Title: Blank

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.29532v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 01:04:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
1

# Python -Fortran Hybrid Programming  to Fuse AI and  Physical 

# Models: Examples of AI -LDA in climate and weather models 

# (Hf2pMDA _v1.0 )

# Xianrui Zhu 1+, Zikuan Lin 2+, Shaoqing Zhang 2*, Zebin Lu 2, Songhua Wu 3,4, Xiangyun Hou 2, Zhisheng 

# Xiao 3, Zhicheng Ren 3, Ji angyu Li 5, Jing Xu 5, Yang Gao 6, Rixu Hao 7, Xiaolin Yu 2, Mingkui Li 2,

# Guangliang Liu 8

> 1

Chongben Honors College, Ocean University of China, Qingdao , 266100 , Chin a

> 2

Key Laboratory of Physical Oceanography, Ministry of Education , and  Institute for Advanced Ocean Study , and  Frontiers 

Science Center for Deep Ocean Multispheres and Earth System (FDOMES), College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences, 

Ocean University of China, Qingdao , 266100 , China 

> 3

Qingdao Leice Transient Technology Co., Ltd., Qingdao , 266100 , China 

> 4

College of Marine Technology, Ocean Remote Sensing Institute, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China 

> 5

Qingdao Marine and Meteorological Institute, Qingdao , 266100 , China 

> 6

Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science and Ecology, Ministry of Education, Frontiers Science Center for Deep 

Ocean Multispheres and Earth System (FDOMES), Ocean University of China, Qingdao, 266100, China 

> 7

College of Intelligent Systems Science and Engineering, and Engineering Research Center of Navigation Instruments, 

Ministry of Education, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China. 

> 8

State Key Laboratory of Physical Oceanography and Artificial Intelligence, Jinan, China. 

> +

Co -first authors who contributed equally to this work. 

*Correspondence to:  Shaoqing Zhang  (szhang@ouc.edu.cn )

Abstract.  Artificial intelligence (AI) provides an unprecedented opportunity for advancing  physics  numerical modeling 

including data assimilation, which  is a  high ly  efficient and  critically -important tool for  advancing our  understanding  on  Earth 

system and  its  applications . At the same time, deep  incorporation of AI and  physical  modeling can make great  driving to 

advance  AI by injecting it rich physics from long time physics -based modeling development . However, since s uch physics 

models  are  conven tionally  cod ed in Fortran and AI algorithm s usually are  conveniently designed in Python, difficult ies exist 

to directly  incorporate  AI algorithm s into  physics  models , vice versa . Here,  based on  the  F2PY ( Fortran to Python interface 

generator ) protocol , we have  developed a procedure that  implement s an infrastructure  which conveniently conducts Python 

and Fortran hybrid modeling and data assimilation (H f2p MDA) to form a program entity so that  AI algorithm s and phys ic al 

models can invoke mutually. As examples, within H f2p MDA,  a climate  coupled data assimilation (CDA)  system is naturally 2

upgraded to a  strongly  CDA  (SCDA) system, and a 1 km high -resolution weather DA system is conveniently implemented 

within a multi -layer downscaling model that has multiscale DA in different nesting layers. In the climate  SCDA  system,  a

coupled general circulation model (CGCM) and  a multiscale filtering algorithm is integrated by a Python main control ler 

(PMC)  that  call s Fortran  CGCM  components  and  Weakly -CDA modules  as well as a data -trained SC DA algorithm  by latent 

space  autoencod er  (AE)  in Python . In th e high -resolution weather DA system, the downscaled model consisting of traditional 

Fortran DA modules in all mother domains and Python AE  DA algorithm  in the central child domain is integrated by  a P MC 

that  organize s these components . With convenient realization of deep incorporation of any AI algorithm and physics model, 

the H f2p MDA has a great potential to make progress on both AI and scientific modeling. 

1 Introduction 

Since the first Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) was born in  the  1940s, numerical weather prediction 

(NWP) models have been developed progressively (Benjamin et al. , 2019) and advanced rapidly in recent years (Haarsma et 

al. , 2016). An NWP model is a set of discretized momentum (dynamics) and energy (thermodynamics) budget equations of 

multi -sphere fluid motions, which can be dated back to the 17th century Newtonian mechanics (Newton , 1687) and 19th 

century Mayer’s and Joule’s energy conservation law (Mayer , 1842; Joule , 1843). Nowadays, an NWP model has advanced 

as an Earth system model (ESM) that consists of coupled atmosphere, ocean, sea -ice, land as well as biogeochemical processes 

etc. multi -sphere components (e.g., Kay et al. , 2015; Danabasoglu et al. , 2020). Now, the ESM is pursuing precise simulation 

and prediction for weather -climate variations through resolving multiscale interactions in the geofluid by developing high -

resolution (HR) model (Zhang et al. , 2023; Mouallem et al. , 2025), which is a critically -important platform for Earth science 

studies (Haarsma et al. , 2016). 

However,  as  the spatial resolution continuously increases, physics -based modeling encounters many challenges (Chang et al. ,

2020; Marotzke , 2023). For example, as a consequence of water phase changing with strong nonlinearity, the genesis and 

melting processes of sea -ice have scales from millimeters (freezing coagulations, for instance) to hundreds of kilometers 

(glaciers, for instance) and r ich scale processes such as melt ponds (e.g. Feng et al. , 2022), ice leads (e.g. Qu et al. , 2024) and 

polynyas (e.g. Diao et al. , 2022) between them. Each scale band plays  a relatively independent and important role ( Golden  et 

al., 2020). Such a multiscale nature makes particular difficulties on HR modeling of sea -ice, since any HR model needs a 

specific parameterization for its sub -grid processes (Gou et al. , 2025). The other outstanding example on HR ESM challenges 

is parameterization of planetary boundary layer (PBL) processes (Jia and Zhang , 2020). When the model horizontal resolution 

comes to a level of kilometers, classic PBL parameterization that deals with low resolution sub -grid boundary processes is no 

longer suitable for describing turbulences induced by differently -featured underneath  underlying  surface structures, such as 

mechanical (roughness), thermal (urban heat) and shear -induced turbulences etc. (Kadivar et al. , 2021). 3

Machine learning artificial intelligence (AI) technology provides unprecedented opportunities to resolve the challenging issu es 

of physics -based HR modeling described above. As long as  data sufficiently represent  an end -to -end process, no matter how 

complex the process is,  the process can be resolved  by a data -training procedure based on neural (deep learning) network 

(Hopfield , 1982; Rumelhart et al. , 1986). Starting from the basic principle of least -square fitting to resolve optimal weighting 

coefficients on a network, AI algorithms advance very rapidly and help greatly enhance accuracy of weather forecasts (Bi et 

al. , 2023) and climate predictions (Ham et al. , 2019).  Studies have revealed that applications of AI techniques can help improve 

traditional physics -based models on frontier challenging issues such as subgrid  parameterizations (e.g. O’ Gorman & Dwyer, 

2018; Han et al., 2020; Yuval & O’ Gorman, 2020) and nonlinear data assimilation (e.g. Wahle et al., 2015; Ruckstuhl et al., 

202 1; Lin et al., 2025).  While data -driven AI technology rapidly spreads into almost every engineering and scientific discipline, 

the data -driven nature limits its further advancement and therefore physics -guided AI merges explosively (Faroughi et al. ,

2024 ; Yuan and Guo, 2024 ). 

Deep incorporation of AI and physical models (let’s call so for wording convenience) can make unbelievable opportunities to 

drive both  of them  even more rapidly advancing by injecting AI rich physics from long time physics -based modeling 

development and letting physical models use any trained AI algorithm. Nevertheless, physical models are conventionally coded 

in Fortran (or Fortran -C hybrid) la nguage and AI algorithms are designed and trained in Python language. Although great 

efforts are made for combining utilities of different languages together (Mü ller et al. , 202 5), deep incorporation of AI and 

physical models is still very difficult because of the lack of convenient infrastructure friendly to physical modelers betwee n

Fortran and Python. At present, on the one hand, most of the physics -guided AI employs some simpl ified physical expressions 

by Python (e.g. Hä fner et al. , 2018; Kochkov et al., 2024; Shu et al., 2025; Hao et al., 2025). On the other hand, physical 

models can only use some selected AI  algorithms that can be translated into Fortran (Heuer et al., 2024) with FTorch library 

that does still not fully support all Torch application interfaces (Atkinson et al., 2025). 

In this study, we document our developing process of Python -Fortran  hybrid programming to establish a convenient 

infrastructure platform on which AI and physical modeling and data assimilation can deeply incorporate with respect to each 

other, called H f2p MDA, based on  the  F2PY ( Fortran to Python interface generator ) protocol (Harris et al., 2020). Basically, 

through 3 steps of preparations in environment setting, recompiling of Fortran codes of physical model and plug interface, an d

simple programming of Python main controller, H f2p MDA conveniently realizes the online deep incorporation of AI and 

physical modeling and data assimilation.  Through exhibitions of two applications on  a coupled  climate  model and a regional 

weather model , we show that H f2p MDA is a readily us er -friendly platform to physical modelers and researchers.  The former 

present s an application of AI latent space data assimilation (LDA) to implement stron gly -coupled DA which has long been 

challenging in climate studies, while the lat ter confirms  that  the AI -LDA can render  high -precision weather  analysis by 

assimilati ng  Lidar  measurements  which include turbulence information. 

This paper is organized as follows.  After the introduction,  Sect . 2 describes the baseline of  F2PY  protocol and outlines the 

general procedure to construct the framework of online Python -Fortran hybrid modeling and data assimilation (H f2p MDA)  and 

as an example of AI algorithms applied in  Hf2p MDA , Sect. 3  describes a variational autoencoder -based AI -LDA algorithm .4

Sect ion s 4 and  5 give examples of detailed implementation  of  applying H f2p MDA to a climate model  to realize strongly -

coupled data assimilation  and a  weather model to fulfill fine -scale convection data assimilation with Lidar measurements .

Finally, summary and discussions are given in  Sec t. 6 .

2 Hf2p MDA  - F2PY -based  Python -Fortran hybrid  programm ing  to fuse AI and physical model and data assimilation 

2.1  Implementation  of H f2p MDA  based on the  F2PY  protocol 

The  F2PY  protocol  (Harris et al., 2020)  provides a basic idea for  design ing  online  Python -Fortran hybrid computation.  A

Python coded program  with  a kind of interpreted  fashion  is directly executed without pre -compiling requirement as compiled 

languages such as Fortran etc.  A natural way to realize hybrid computation of Python and Fortran is that Python -callable 

Fortran (PCF) modules can be imported into a Python main controller (PMC) as callable objects and scientific Fortran 

computation can call Python -coded AI algorithms  as subroutine or function. To that end, there are  four  aspects of concerns 

that need to be addressed in an infrastructure of Python -Fortran hybrid modeling and data assimilation (Hf2pMDA) designed 

in this study: (1) computational environment needs to be set to support both the Python and Fortran computations;  (2) Fortran 

model codes need to be recompiled so that they become PCF modules;  (3) some of Python codes need to be Fortran -callable 

so that they become  Fortran -callable Python (F CP)  modules  for which the Fortran program can directly call;  (4) a PMC needs 

to be designed and  application -oriented interfaces need to be designed to link PCF modules to PMC, and let scientific Fortran 

computation being able to call Python -coded AI algorithms.  We  describe  the details of implementation of 4 aspects above as 

4 steps in  Text S1: General procedure of implementation of H f2p MDA.  Following the procedure above and taking care of 

some key points noted in  Section 2.2 , we can  construct  Hf2p MDA . By these 4 steps , within the  Hf2p MDA, the scientific 

modeling and machine learning can be  fused together as illustrated in  Fig. 1 . On the one hand, it readily realizes “AI for 

science,” i.e., when AI algorithms can help resolve challenging issues in physical modeling and data assimilation, such 

algorithms can be directly applied to legacy Fortran codes from lon g-time scientific advancement . On the other hand, the 

Hf2p MDA  can help on “science for AI,” i.e., if necessary, the scientific computation results can directly join the training process. 

Examples include reinforcement learning in which dynamics is used as a part of training constraint (Banerjee et al., 2025; Su n

et  al., 2025). 5         

> Fig ure 1: A schematic illustration of the designed H f2p MDA to fuse Fortran scientific model sand Python machine learning.

Next, after addressing innovative key points in Hf2pMDA implementation and Hf2pMDA ’s merits, we will  give application 

examples of  Hf2p MDA , in which an AI DA algorithm is fused into climate and weather models to fulfill strongly -coupled DA 

and fine -scale convection DA with Lidar measurements. 

2.2  Notes of key points in  Hf2p MDA  implementation and  Hf2p MDA ’s merits 

The  F2PY is a standard utility distributed with NumPy, which is one of the foundational libraries for numerical computing in 

Python (Harris et al., 2020). It has been widely used to generate Python interfaces for Fortran routines and has become part  of 

the sci entific Python build ecosystem, including applications in SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020), WRF -Python ( Ladwig , 2017), 

GeoCAT -f2py (UCAR/NCAR, 202 0), and related tools.  Although F2PY has traditionally been used to wrap individual Fortran 

functions or libraries for Python -side invocation, its potential for coupling legacy scientific models with Python -based 

algorithms has not been fully exploited. This is partly because F2 PY was originally designed for workflows in which Python 

acts as the main “glue” language, whereas  usually  physical  Earth system model s (including data assimilation)  are organized 

around compiled Fortran drivers, deeply nested physical parameterization routines, and tightly controlled time -stepping 6

procedures. As a result, directly introducing Python -based machine learning or data assimilation algorithms into such models 

is not always straightforward. 

In H f2p MDA, F2PY is used in two complementary  path s to bridge this gap.  Here , the first  path  is referred to as  “PMC organizing 

PCF modules ,” where a Python  main  control layer reorganizes and invokes Python -call able  Fortran  (PCF)  modules. The 

second  path  is referred to as  “Fortran program calling FCP functions ,” where the original Fortran execution flow is largely 

preserved and Python functions are invoked through callback interfaces. Together, these two  path s allow H f2p MDA to support 

both Python -driven model orchestration and callback -based embedding of Python algorithms into existing Fortran model 

workflows.  The key notes of these two paths will be described in detail in the following 2 subsections combined with  Fig. 3 

together. 

2.2.1 PMC organizing PCF modules 

Similar to the strategy adopted in fv3gfs -wrapper (McGibbon et al., 2021), the path of PMC organizing PCF modules 

decomposes the original Fortran model workflow into callable components. Key model routines and state variables are first 

exported from the or iginal scientific model and then wrapped as Python -callable Fortran modules through F2PY utilities. The 

PMC can subsequently invoke these wrapped components, reorganize the execution logic, and insert Python -side algorithms 

such as pre -processing, machine  learning, data assimilation, and post -processing etc. 

The major advantage of this path is its conceptual simplicity. Instead of embedding Python directly inside the original Fortr an 

time -stepping loop, the model components are exposed to Python and then controlled externally by PMC. This makes the 

Python -Fort ran coupling workflow eas y to  understand and debug, and makes algorithm development more flexible. Moreover, 

the F2PY signature -file mechanism allows users to explicitly specify which Fortran routines should be exposed. Together with 

support for static or dynamic libraries, this makes  it possible to integrate the wrapping process into an existing system without 

manually writing C glue -code layers. In this sense, F2PY can automatically generate native Python C/API extension modules 

that connect Python with the compiled Fortran component s. 

The implementation procedure can be summarized as follows. First, the original Fortran workflow is decomposed into several 

callable components, and the required data by Python -side algorithms are identified  (➊ in  Fig.  2a). Second, F2PY is used to 

generate or customize the signature file  (➋ in  Fig.  2a). Third, the scientific model or selected components are compiled into a 

linkable library and then wrapped by F2PY ( ➌ in  Fig.  2a). Finally, the PMC reorganizes the model logic and integrates Python -

side algorithms into the workflow  (➍ in  Fig.  2a).7    

> Fig ure 2: A schematic illustration of the path of a) PMC organizing PCF modules, and b) Fortran program calling FCP functions
> in Hf2p MDA.

2.2.2 Fortran program calling FCP functions 

The path of PMC organizing PCF modules is effective when the main model workflow can be reasonably decomposed into 

independent callable components. However, this strategy can become labor -intensive, or even impractical, for highly 

undisassembled  models (multiple nested layers with recursive routine calls, for instance), especially when the variables 

required by Python -side algorithms are produced or updated in lower -level routines rather than in the top -level driver. For 

models such as WRF, whose  execution flow involves deeply nested physical and dynamical processes, extracting all relevant 

components into a Python -controlled workflow may require extensive refactoring and change the original model organization. 

To resolve this difficulty, H f2p MDA also supports a callback -based strategy by the path of Fortran program calling FCP 

functions. This strategy is conceptually related to previous efforts such as WRF –ML v1.0 (Zhong et al., 2023), Arnold et al. 

(2024), and Zhang et al. (2025), in which Py thon -side algorithms are invoked from Fortran model code. The  different  part of 

Hf2pMDA is that the original Fortran program remains the primary execution driver, while selected Fortran routines call a 8

callback -facing interface only when Python -side computation is required. The corresponding Python functions are registered 

through the F2PY -generated layer and are subsequently invoked during model execution. 

A key merit of this path is that it reduces intrusive refactoring of the host model. Instead of decomposing the entire model 

workflow and reconstructing it under Python control, only a thin callback -facing Fortran interface is inserted at the locations 

whe re Python -side algorithms need to interact with the host model. Lower -level Fortran routines can pass model states or 

diagnostic variables to this interface, receive the computed results from Python, and then continue the original execution fl ow. 

In this w ay, the Python -Fortran coupling is concentrated at well -defined interface points, while most of the host model 

implementation, build structure, and runtime logic remain unchanged. 

Nevertheless, this callback -based approach still requires a Python -side registration stage. The callback function is not simply 

called as an ordinary external routine inside a standalone Fortran executable. Instead, it must first be registered through t he 

F2PY -generated Python module, after which the pre -built Fortran logic can invoke the registered callback during execution. 

In practice, this means that  the  PMC still need to initialize the coupling environment, register the Python callback, and launch 

or coordinate the host -side Fortran entry point. This forms a two -stage workflow: the callback is registered at the Python/F2PY 

boundary, whereas the actual cal lback invocation occurs later inside the host -side Fortran execution. 

In contrast to  the path of PMC organizing PCF modules, t he workflow of the path of Fortran program calling FCP functions 

can be summarized in  Fig.  2b. While sharing the fundamental logistics of  ➊-➍ in  Fig.  2a, the path of Fortran program calling 

FCP functions needs to add Python callback statements and interface in  ➊-➋. The Fortran interface is defined to specify how 

the host model communicates with Python -side functions, and the relevant lower -level Fortran routines are modified to call 

this interface when Python -side computation is required.  While  ➌ remains nearly unchanged (except for including the  callback 

interface -facing), in  ➍, the PMC needs to register callback utility and add  host_entry ()  as well as the required import 

library .

In practice, the two paths described above can of course be used together in the same job if necessary. From the following 

Sect.  3 on, we will describe a Latent -3DVar (L3DVar) AI data assimilation schem e that uses autoencoder (AE) to carry out 

latent space transformation and 3 -dimensional variational (3D -Var) minimization to absorb observational information. 

3 An AE  Latent  Space  3D -Var (L3DVar) within H f2p MDA 

In general, in the framework of H f2p MDA implemented in  Sect. 2 , any AI algorithm can be fused with Fortran -programmed 

scientific computation. As application examples of H f2p MDA, here we describe a Latent Space 3D -Var (L3DVar) AI data 

assimilation algorithm that will be applied to a climate model to realize SCDA ( Sect. 4 ) and a weather model to fulfill fine -

scale Lidar observation assimilation ( Sect. 5 ). The L3DVar AI DA algorithm  consists of  AE  latent space transformation and 

3D -Var  minimization  in the  latent space (Cheng et al., 2022 ; Melinc and Zaplotnik, 2024 ). 9

3.1  The principle of  AE latent space transformation 

Autoencoders (AEs) are neural representation -learning models that learn a compact latent representation of high -dimensional 

inputs through an encoder –decoder architecture. In geophysical applications, multiple physical variables can be arranged as 

separate  input channels, enabling the encoder to extract a joint low -dimensional representation of multivariate spatial structures 

(Hinton and  Salakhutdinov 2006; Fan et al. 2025a, b; Fan et al. 2026).  Let  𝐱  ∈ ℝ𝑛  denote a normalized physical -space state 

vector containing atmosphere, ocean, or other model variables. The trained encoder  𝐸  maps  𝐱  into a latent vector  𝐳  ∈ ℝ𝑟 , and 

the trained decoder  𝐷  maps  𝐳  back to the physical space: 

𝐳  = 𝐸 (𝐱 ), 𝐱 ˆ = 𝐷 (𝐳 ). (1)

Here,  𝐱 ˆ is the reconstructed physical -space state. In this study, the AE is trained before data assimilation and then kept fixed 

during the assimilation procedure. The detailed reconstruction loss, variable normalization strategy, and application -specific 

trainin g settings are provided in the  Text S2:  Implementation details of an AE architecture,  while a schematic workflow of 

AE -based transformation between the physical space and latent space is shown in  Fig. 3a .

Variational autoencoders (VAEs), introduced by  Kingma and Welling  (20 13 ), extend this framework by imposing a 

probabilistic latent prior, commonly a standard Gaussian distribution, through the Kullback –Leibler divergence term in the 

variational objective. This regularization can produce a smoother and more structured latent space, but it may also degrade 

reconstruction accuracy when the regularization is too strong. Because the performance of the subseq uent assimilation is 

directly affected by the fidelity of the decoded analysis fields, we adopt a deterministic AE rather than a VAE in this study .

Previous latent -space data assimilation studies have further shown that suitably trained autoencoders can yi eld latent 

representations with weakly correlated or approximately diagonal background -error covariance structures, which makes 

simplified covariance assumptions more plausible for latent -space variational assimilation, including latent -space 3DVar (Fan 

et  al. 2026). 10 

Fig ure  3:  Schematic workflow of the AE -based Latent Space 3D -Var (L3DVar) algorithm. (a) AE training provides a nonlinear 

encoder –decoder transformation between the physical model space and a reduced latent space. (b) In the online assimilation stage, 

the background  state  𝐱 𝒃  is encoded into the latent background vector  𝐳 𝒃 , observational information is incorporated through latent -

space 3D -Var minimization, and the optimized latent vector  𝐳 𝒂  is decoded to produce the physical -space analysis field  𝐱 𝒂 . 𝐁 𝒛  and  𝐑 

denote the latent -space background -error covariance matrix and the observation -error covariance matrix, respectively. 

3.2  Latent space  minimization  in general 

Based on the AE transformation described in  Sect. 3.1 , L3DVar introduces a variational minimization process in the latent 

space, as illustrated in  Fig. 3b . Given a background physical -space state  𝐱 𝑏 , its latent representation is first obtained by the 

trained encoder as  𝐳 𝑏  = 𝐸 (𝐱 𝑏 ). The analysis latent vector  𝐳 𝑎  is then estimated by minimizing a 3D -Var -type cost function in 

the latent space :

J(z) = 1

2 ‖z − zb‖Bz 

> −1
> 2

+ 1

2 ‖y − ℋ(D(z))‖R−1 

> 2

(2)

In this formulation,  𝐁 𝑧  is the background -error covariance matrix in the latent space,  𝐑  is the observation -error covariance 

matrix,  𝐲  denotes the observation vector, and  ℋ is the observation operator that maps the decoded physical -space state to the 

observation space. The two covariance matrices weight and nondimensionalize the background and observation misfit terms, 11 

respectively. After minimization, the physical -space analysis state is obtained by decoding the optimized latent vector, i.e., 

𝐱 𝑎  = 𝐷 (𝐳 𝑎 ).

This formulation differs from conventional physical -space 3D -Var in that the control variable is the reduced latent vector  𝐳 

rather than the full model state  𝐱 . Therefore, the dimension of the minimization problem is substantially reduced, while the 

observation constraint is still evaluated in the physical observation space through the decoded state  𝐷 (𝐳 ). Because the decoder 

is nonlinear and consists of learned neural -network transformations, the resulting observational correction can represent 

nonlinear cross -variable relationships even though the cost function retains a 3D -Var form. This property is par ticularly useful 

for strongly coupled data assimilation, in which observations from one component, such as the atmosphere or ocean, are 

expected to directly adjust the coupled state of another component through the learned latent representation (Cheng et a l., 2024; 

Lin et al., 2025). 

The L3DVar workflow shown in  Fig. 3b  therefore provides a general latent -space assimilation operator. The background state 

𝐱 𝑏  is encoded into the latent background vector  𝐳 𝑏 , observational information is incorporated through variational minimization, 

and the optimized latent state  𝐳 𝑎  is decoded back to the physical space as the analysis field  𝐱 𝑎 . This general workflow is 

independent of the specific host model and can be coupled to different Fortran -based models through the H f2p MDA 

infrastructure. 

3.3  The  AE  data -training  process and 3D -Var  latent space  minimization  for L3DVar 

The implementation of L3DVar in H f2p MDA consists of an offline AE training stage and an online assimilation stage. During 

the offline stage, the encoder  𝐸  and decoder  𝐷  are trained using application -specific model states. The basic transformation 

between physical and latent spaces follows the general AE architecture shown in  Fig. 3a , whereas the detailed network 

structure, training samples, normalization procedure, and reconstruction loss are determined by the target application and ar e

therefore documented in the Supplementary Information  and cited  in the corresponding application sections. 

During the online assimilation stage, the trained AE is used as a fixed Python -side AI algorithm within H f2p MDA. At each 

assimilation time, the background state  𝐱 𝑏  provided by the host model is passed to the encoder  𝐸  to obtain the latent 

background vector  𝐳 𝑏 . The latent -space cost function  𝐽 (𝐳 ) is then minimized using an efficient PyTorch -based optimizer, such 

as Adam (Kingma and Ba, 201 4) . When the prescribed convergence criterion is satisfied, the optimized latent vector  𝐳 𝑎  is 

decoded by  𝐷  to generate the physical -space analysis field  𝐱 𝑎 . This analysis field is then returned to the host model and used 

as the initial condition for the next model integration step. 

This implementation design provides the algorithmic connection between the general H f2p MDA infrastructure in  Sect. 2  and 

the model -specific applications in  Sects. 4 and 5 . In the climate application, the same L3DVar operator is inserted into the 

coupled atmosphere –ocean data assimilation workflow to realize SCDA. In the weather application, the operator is coupled to 

a high -resolution model workflow to assimilate fine -scal e Lidar observations. Thus,  this section  defines the application -12 

independent L3DVar algorithm,  and  the following sections describe how this algorithm is embedded into specific Fortran -

based modeling systems through H f2p MDA. 

4 Hf2p MDA applied to  a climate model  to realize strongly -coupled data assimilation (SCDA) 

4.1  The CM2  and its  weakly -coupled data assimilation (WCDA)  system 

The CM2  is a fully -coupled Earth system  model consist ing  of the atmosphere , ocean , land and sea -ice components  (Lin, 2004; 

Gnanadesikan  et al., 2006; Winton, 2000), having been an important member of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 

(CMIP) (Delworth et al., 2006 b; Randall, 2007; Taylor et al., 2012; Eyring et al., 2016) . The  version we used in this study has 

the  atmosphere model  with  2°latitude × 2.5°longitude  horizontal resolution and 24 vertical levels , and  the ocean  with 1° ×1° 

horizontal resolution  and  50 vertical levels , time stepping with  30 minutes  and  2 hours  for atmosphere and ocean as well as 

their coupling.  As the first CGCM ’s CDA system , the first version of CM2 -CDA was developed based on the ensemble Kalman 

filter (EnKF) (Zhang and Anderson, 2003 ; Zhang et al., 2007),  implemented  in  a weakly -CDA ( WCDA ) manner , i.e., the 

atmosphere and ocean conduct their DA in their own model components . However, a n EnKF  CDA system is very expensive 

and has a limitation on extracting low -frequency observational signals (Yu et al., 2019). To resolv e this issue, based on scale 

disassembling of a long time series of single model solution and the EnKF ’s framework, a multiscale high -efficiency 

approximate EnKF (MSHea -EnKF) was designed (Yu et al., 2019) and implemented into the CM2 (Lu et al., 202 3). Therefore, 

the current version of CM2 -CDA employed in this study uses a sequential WCDA procedure which forwards on single CM2 

coupled model integrated with atmosphere -ocean observations as they are available.  In the way of  MSHea -EnKF , instead of 

forwarding the coupled model in an ensemble manner, the multiscale background ensembles are initially constructed from a 

long time series of single model solution  but innovated with the ongoing CDA procedure. 

In a WCDA procedure, the atmosphere (ocean) observations only adjust the atmosphere (ocean)  its  own state and observational 

information  is  transfer red  cross the atmosphere and ocean by coupled model exchanged fluxes. Without direct observational 

adjustment between the atmosphere and ocean, imperfect coupling physics may still introduce errors into the coupled model 

and CDA remains in an incomplete fashi on. The strongly -CDA (SCDA) has been pursued to fulfill sufficient balanced and 

coherent coupled state estimation in CDA (Zhang et al., 2020) but  it remains challenging  (e.g. De Rosnay  et al., 2022) imposed 

by the limitation of linear regression in traditional DA algorithms for such different characteristic scales cross the atmosp here 

and ocean. The natural nonlinear nature of machine deep learning AI algorithms makes SCDA feasible if i t is inserted into a 

WCDA system as an additional term. 

Next, we will describe how to apply the H f2p MDA framework outlined in  Sect . 2 so that an AI SCDA scheme can be  fused 

with the legacy  CM2 -CDA to  form  an H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA .13 

4.2  Hf2p MDA  fusing L3DVar with CM2 -CDA to form  Hf2p MDA -CM2 SCDA 

In general, the CM2 model has a very clear modular feature, in which the atmosphere and ocean components have relatively -

independent structure, with land as atmospheric boundary processes and sea -ice being the interface of atmosphere and ocean. 

We use the path of PMC organizing PCF modules (as shown in  Fig. 2 a) to implement  Hf2p MDA -CM2 SCDA . The main controller 

coupler_main  organizes all interfaces between model components and loops time integration as every half hour for the 

atmosphere and every two hours for the ocean and atmosphere -ocean coupling . The weakly CDA conducts atmosphere (ocean) 

DA computation within the atmosphere (ocean) component and it therefore does not change the basic logic structure of 

coupler_main.  The entire  CM2 -CDA package of codes consists of 4 static libraries:  libfms.a , libland.a , libecda.a  and 

libcoupler.a . Here  libfms.a  contains all the lowest shared information such as MPI and remapping functions etc. and  libland.a 

is a relatively -independent application package for land model based on  libfms.a , while  libecda.a  includes all atmosphere and 

ocean model components as well as CDA subroutines beside land model. Finally,  libcoupler.a  is the highest infrastructure to 

connect all parts above together by  coupler_main . To make all Fortran modules in these static libraries becoming PCF modules, 

we first partition the main controller  coupler_main.F90  as two parts,  cm2_cda_mainsubs.F90  and  cm2_cda_plugs.F90.  The 

cm2_cda_mainsubs.F90  is basically a modified version of  coupler_main.F90 , in which  the main program is  disassembled into 

a list of subroutines such as  cm2_cda_maininit() , atmos_step()  and  ocean_step()  etc. as module initialization and single step 

model integration. The  cm2_cda_plugs.F90  simply organizes various model component integration of single step as plug -ins 

(tool_atmos_step()  and  tool_ocean_step()  etc., for instance) for PMC. 

Following the procedure described in  Sec t.  2, we first recompile 4 static libraries  libfms.a , libland.a , libecda.a  and  libcoupler.a 

by adding  “-fPIC ” option tag. Then we use  f2py  to combine  cm2_cda_plugs.F90  with these 4  static libraries together to create 

the signature file  cm2_cda.pyf  and DLL  cm2_cda.python -311 -x86_64 -linux -gnu.so . Finally, the DLL  cm2_cda.python -311 -

x86_64 -linux -gnu.so  is copied  to work directory where  cm2_cda_main.py  is stored. 

Based on  the guideline of PMC ’s structure described in  Text S1  Step -4 and  Sec t.  2. 2.1 , we construct the  PMC  of H f2p MDA -

CM2 SCDA , called  cm2_cda_main.py.  In this case, as  arranging time integration of the coupled model,  cm2_cda_main.py  also 

is responsible for  connecting the atmosphere -ocean interface with the AI SCDA algorithm implemented by  L3DVar  described 

in  Sect . 3 . Then following the procedure described in  Text S1  Step -4, we can run  cm2_cda_main.py  to  complete the process 

of H f2p MDA -CM2 SC DA ’s design and execution. 

Since the PMC  cm2_cda_main.py  conducts the coupled model time integration and it explicitly controls the evolution of 

coupling interface between the atmosphere and ocean, we can conveniently insert SCDA into the model integration.  Next, we 

will  evaluate  the results of  AE  latent space reconstructing  coupling variables as well as resulted  SCDA  by  minimization  in the 

latent space. 14 

4.3 Test  results of SCDA by H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA 

4.3.1  The AE reconstruction of physical variables at air -sea interface  by latent space 

In the H f2p MDA -CM2 SC DA  system, to produce SCDA results, we first train the encoder and decoder to reconstruct the reduced -

order state in latent space using the atmosphere and ocean state variables at the air -sea interface. High -efficiently reconstructing 

the latent space with n ecessary accuracy is the core of training scheme which consists of various selections on parameters and 

loop levels as well as neural networks etc. For the CM2 -SCDA, we set the input vector  𝑥 0 consisting of the atmosphere surface 

wind, temperature and pressure (U s, V s, T s, P s), and ocean surface currents, temperature and height (SSU, SSV, SST, SSH). 

The concrete  architecture design and  training process  are  described  in  Text S2 .1 and S 2.2 . However, it  is worth to mention 

that different from a general case in which the physical state usually only includes information within a component of multi -

sphere geofluid, in this SCDA case, the physical state being transformed consists of atmospheric and oceanic info rmation with 

different characteristic scales. Under this circumstance, the AE training process therefore includes a Cross Attention step w hich 

consists of mixing and its inverse (separation). Apart from this point, the AE still follows a pretty general tra ining procedure 

for  downsampling and upsampling. 

All variables are normalized by their corresponding variable ranges before training. The training dataset is constructed from  a

50 -year  free -running  CM2  simulation  sampled every 3 h  (totally 14600 samples in time) . The validation set contains 16060 

samples and is used to evaluate the reconstruction accuracy. Because the main objective of this study is to evaluate the 

feasibility of latent -space data assimilation rather than to develop a general -purpose reconstructi on model, the independent 

assimilation cases are treated as the practical out -of -sample tests. 15   

> Figure 4: Reconstruction of CM2 atmospheric air –sea interface variables in the AE latent space. Rows show surface pressure (Ps),
> surface temperature (Ts), surface zonal wind (Us) and surface meridional wind (Vs). Columns show the original normalized fiel d,
> the recon structed field decoded from the latent vector, the reconstruction error and the radially averaged power spectrum of the
> original and reconstructed fields.

Figures  4 and  5 show representative reconstruction examples for the atmospheric and oceanic variables, respectively. The 

reconstructed fields  (middle -left panels)  preserve the main large -scale structures of the original variables  (left most  panels) ,

and the corresponding errors  (middle -right panels)  remain small compared with the normalized field amplitudes. The spectra 

(right most  panels)  further show that the reconstructed fields retain the dominant low -wavenumber structures and follow the 

original spectral slopes over most resolved scales, although slight smoothing is still visible at the highest wavenumbers. Th is 

behavior is expected for  an encoder –decoder representation and does not prevent the reconstructed fields from providing a 

physically reasonable background for latent -space assimilation. 16    

> Figure 5:Same as Fig. 4, but for CM2 oceanic air –sea interface variables, including sea surface height (SSH), sea surface temperature
> (SST), surface zonal current (SSU) and surface meridional current (SSV).

The quantitative metrics in  Table 1  confirm this visual assessment. Here, MSE, MAE and RMSE denote the mean squared 

error, mean absolute error and root mean squared error of the normalized fields, respectively. SSIM denotes the structural 

similarity index, and PSNR denotes the peak signal -to-noise ratio. The total SSIM reaches 0.9945, indicating that the AE 

preserves the spatial structure of the coupled air –sea interface variables. Among the selected variables, the ocean current 

components have relatively larger errors than the thermodynamic  variables, reflecting their stronger small -scale variability. 

Overall, the reconstruction accuracy is sufficient for the following SCDA experiment. 17   

> Table 1 :Validation -set reconstruction metrics for CM2 air –sea interface variables in the AE latent space. The metrics are calculated
> from 16060 validation samples after variable normalization. “Total” denotes the metric averaged over all selected atmospheric and
> oceanic variables.

Variables  MSE  MAE  RMSE  SSIM  PSNR 

Ps  0.0002  0.010  0.014  0.9996  51.53 

Ts  0.0035  0.035  0.059  0.9977  39.10 

Us  0.0040  0.045  0.063  0.9977  41.29 

Vs  0.0054  0.053  0.074  0.9967  41.35 

SSH  0.0013  0.024  0.036  0.9991  46.27 

SST  0.0008  0.018  0.027  0.9992  40.88 

SSU  0.0148  0.079  0.120  0.9918  38.90 

SSV  0.0320  0.117  0.178  0.9854  39.90 

Total  0.0109  0.056  0.104  0.9945  40.11 

4.3.2  Latent -space evaluation and  𝐁 𝒛 -related correlation diagnosis 

After verifying the reconstruction accuracy, we further examine whether the latent variables provide a suitable control space 

for variational assimilation. In  L3DVar, the background -error covariance matrix  𝐁 𝑧  weights the departure of the analysis latent 

vector from the background latent vector. A simplified  𝐁 𝑧  is only useful when the latent variables are not strongly correlated .

Here we adopt  an NMC -like method  (Parrish and Derber, 1992)  to calculate the correlation of temporal differences to 

approximate  the  𝐁 𝑧 .

Figure  6 shows three complementary diagnostics. The channel -correlation matrix indicates that the latent channels are 

dominated by diagonal elements, although weak off -diagonal structures remain. These residual correlations are not unexpected, 

because the CM2 late nt vector represents coupled atmospheric and oceanic interface variables with different spatial scales. 

The spatial -correlation matrix for a representative latent channel also shows a clear diagonal dominance, suggesting that the 

latent representation does  not introduce strong long -range artificial dependence. Finally, the distribution of off -diagonal 

correlations is sharply centered near zero, with 95% of absolute off -diagonal correlations smaller than about 0.29 0.

These diagnostics indicate that the trained latent space is  sufficiently decorrelated for the present demonstration. The near -

diagonal structure provides practical support for using a simplified  𝐁 𝑧  like a diagonal matrix  in the latent -space minimization. 18   

> Figure 6:Latent -space correlation diagnosis for the CM2 AE representation. (a) Correlation matrix among latent channels. (b)
> Spatial correlation matrix for a representative latent channel. (c) Probability density distribution of off -diagonal correlation
> coefficien ts. The dashed vertical lines mark the 95% range of absolute off -diagonal correlations.

4.3.3  The SCDA results 

In the case of H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA , through the AE training, we establish a latent space which is transformed from the air -sea 

interface space so that we can efficiently conduct minimization to blend atmospheric and oceanic observations into the model 

space. Here while the size of coupled  state vector in physical space is  339840 , through space transformation, the state vector 

size in the latent space becomes  40500  with a reduction rate of  88 %, which makes fast and efficient minimization feasible. 

Next, we will show that although only  12 % of physical space vector size is used in latent space minimization, the reconstruction 

fields are reasonably represent ing  the background physical information for extracting observational information. 

In this test case, we use the ERA5 (5 th  generation atmospheric reanalysis of European Centre for Medium -Range Weather 

Forecasts) surface pressure Ps (with a 25 km horizontal resolution) and OISST (NOAA 1/4° Daily Optimum Interpolation Sea 

Surface Temperature) as atmospheric and oceanic observati ons respectively.  With the usual observational errors of 5 hPa (for 

Ps) and 0.5  oC (for SST),  we run the H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  system on the whole  year of  1982 and present a typical minimization 

process and the whole year verification results in  Figs.  7a-b. The latent space can be comprehended as a reduced -order 

holographic space that represents all nonlinear complex relationships of physical variables. In this space, as minimization 

proceeds  (see details in  Text S3 ), when the observation loss decreases, the latent space state vector  z gets adjusted as the 

background loss increases so that the observations are coherently incorporated into the background at the convergent point 

that the background and observation reach equilibrium. 

Fig ures . 7a-b show  that due to the low -frequency and quasi -linear nature of ocean motions, both WCDA and SCDA make the 

model SST quickly converge to observations and keep in nearly RMSEs in most of the time. In the contrary, because of strong 

internal variability of the atm osphere, the curves of Ps RMSEs in WCDA and SCDA quickly separate after a few days, but 

SCDA does not show  its advantage  within a few months. After about 4~5 months, SCDA starts to show a little smaller RMSEs. 

In terms of a 6 -month mean in July to December, SCDA reduces the WCDA ’s RMSE by roughly 4%, in which SCDA ’s RMSE 19 

is 4.62 out of 4.81 of WCDA ’s.  The  examples of spatial distributions of differences of SST and P s RMSEs between SCDA 

and WCDA are given in  Figs. 7 c-d, which show that the large effects of SCDA occur mainly in the tropics for SST and middle -

high latitude storm track area for P s. More examples for SST produced by SCDA and WCDA and their differences are shown 

in  Fig. 8 .                  

> Fig ure 7:ab) The time series of root mean squared errors (RMSEs) of SST and Ps in free model control simulation (CTL) (blue),
> and WCDA (orange ) as well as SCDA (green) produced by Hf2pMDA -CM2 CDA at the 200 th iteration of minimization. The WCDA
> is a multiscale high -efficient approximate filter (MSHea -EnKF) . cd) Distributions of the mean differences of RMSEs of SST and Ps
> in SCDA and WCDA (SCDA -WCDA) in the sub -time series from 1982 -10 -24 0130Z to 1982 -11 -8 0130Z (denoted by the dashed -
> black box in panels a-b).

Figure 8  indicates that SCDA can produce large effects on the tropical instability waves (TIWs) since very high -frequency 

atmosphere -ocean flux exchanges occur and easily render strong nonlinearity.  It ’s worth to mention that in this H f2p MDA -

CM2 CDA  case, the model resolution is pretty low (~200 km for the atmosphere and ~100 km for the ocean). Under the 

circumstance, the coupled model dynamics in general is quasi -linear ( Perlwitz  et al., 2017), and it is possible that WCDA can 

extract the most of observational information into the coupled model. However, our preliminary results using H f2p MDA -

CM2 CDA  exhibit the promise that after a sufficient time scale, SCDA can create additional values to the CDA system , especially 

for the active air -sea interaction (TIWs, for instance) regions . This may become critically -important as the model attempts to 

resolve fine -scale and frequent air -sea coupling processes as a tropical cyclone or mesoscale eddy passes by. 

The results above show that in this test case,  although only 6% of physical space vector size is used in latent space minimization, 

the reconstruction fields are  able  to represent the background physical information for extracting observational information. 20        

> Figure 8: The physical samples of SST and SSU at the four times. The dashed -black box i neach panel marks the area of active
> tropical instability waves where the SCDA easily renders difference from WCDA as shown by t he middle -left and most -right
> column s denoted as SCDA minus WCDA . 4 sets of SCDA SST and SSU and their increments from WCDA at 1982 -10 -29 0130Z,
> 1982 -11 -01 0130Z, 1982 -11 -04 0130Z and 1982 -11 -07 0130Z are shown in the upper -left, upper -right, lower -left and lower -right.

5 Hf2p MDA applied to  a weather  model  to realize fine -scale convection data assimilation (FSDA) 

5.1  WRF and its multiscale  data assimilation  syste m

Here we use  a version of  Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF, v 3.7.1 ) model  configured  as 3 -layer nesting  at 9 , 3 and 1 

km horizontal resolution s for the West of China (D01), Central Sichuan Province (D02) and Chengdu City (D03) respectively 

as shown in  Fig.  9a. The  WRF  model  is divided into  50  vertical levels from the surface to the model top at 50 hPa . The model 

includ es  most of the  primary physic s such as the  Kain -Fritsch convection parameterization  (Kain, 2004),  Rapid Radiative 

Transfer Model for GCMs (RRTMG) longwave and shortwave radiations  (Clough et al., 2005) and  Yonsei University (YSU) 

boundary layer  (Hu et al., 2013) as well as  WRF single -moment 3 -class (WSM3) microphysics  (Hong et al., 2004) etc . The 

initial and boundary conditions are  drawn  from the  ERA5  reanalysis dataset in this study . The original purpose of this WRF 

configuration is to study the impact of lidar observations on the Chengdu City. Here we employ it to exhibit the capability t o

conveniently carry out parallel experiments using H f2p MDA conducting traditional DA and AI L 3DVar .21      

> Fig ure 9:The configurations of a) 3 -layer nesting model domain at 9, 3 and 1 km horizontal resolutions for the West China (D01),
> Central Sichuan Province (D02) and Chengdu City (D03), b) conventional observation stations in D02, and c) Lidar stations deployed
> in Chengdu City D03.

Same as the CM2 -CDA described in  Sect . 3.1 , a multiscale high -efficiency approximate EnKF (MSHea -EnKF) (Yu et al., 

2019) data assimilation algorithm is used in this multi -layer nesting WRF to carry out multiscale observational information 

extraction (Wang et al., 2024). To do that, we conduct the  large scale  “observational ” constraint in D01 using ERA5 ’s wind 

and temperature, local data constraint in D02 and D03 using the conventional observations shown in  Fig.  9b (in D02) as well 

as additional Lidar observations shown in  Fig.  9c (in D03).  In this study, once the H f2p MDA -WRF FSD A system (will be 

described in the next section) is set, we use it to conduct parallel assimilation experiments in the 1 km resolution Chengdu  City 

core domain by the classic MSHea -EnKF and  AI  L3DVar  to test validation of the H f2p MDA -WRF FSD A.

5.2  Hf2p MDA  fusing L3DVar with WRF DA  to form  Hf2p MDA -WRF FS DA 

Unlike the CM2 model which is highly modularized, the WRF model uses a recursive function called  integrate  to perform 

downscaling simulations by inputting differently -defined domain as its argument. Under this circumstance,  we use the path of 

Fortran program calling FCP functions (as shown in  Fig. 3 b) to implement  Hf2p MDA -WRF FS DA . We adopt a strategy in which 

the WRF main program is changed to a module containing subroutine  wrf  and the whole model and its DA codes are packed 

as an entity that is used by  wrfda_plug.F90 . In this case, the  wrfda_plug.F90  only defines a subroutine called  call_wrf_main 

which calls the subroutine  wrf  and defines an  external python_foo  before the subroutine call. The  python_foo  is passed in by 22 

the  call_wrf_main  as an argument  from the PMC that will be described  below . The external  python_foo  is a trained LDA 

algorithm which is used by  callback_python.F90  where a  python_da  interface is defined as a Fortran subroutine which is public 

to any Fortran module if applicable. 

Once the preparation described above is done, we follow the procedures described in  Text S1  to complete environment setting 

and Fortran codes compiling. At this point, the signature file  wrfda.pyf  and the  “shared object ” wrfda.cpython -311 -x86_64 -

linux -gnu.so  are ready for being imported to PMC. 

In this case, the PMC  wrfda_main.py  is very concise. After importing necessary Fortran and Python modules including some 

interfaces and utilities for usage of L 3DVar , the  wrfda_main.py  directly makes a Python call to  call_wrf_main  as 

wrfda .wrfda_plug .call_wrf_main (transpond ). Here the  transpond  is the function that will become external  python_foo  in the 

subroutine  call_wrf_main  by argument passing. Following the procedure described in  Sec t.  2.3.2 , we can execute the 

Hf2p MDA -WRF DA  system. 

5.3 Test  results of  FSDA by  Hf2p MDA -WRF FSD A

5.3.1  The AE reconstruction of  WRF  D03  physical variables  by latent space 

We use ERA5 dataset to create boundary and initial conditions and conduct 3 -layer nesting downscaling simulations as 

described in  Sect . 5.1 . Each case is run for 36 hours with hourly output in D03. We discard the first 12 hours as downscaling 

spinup and connect all data in last 24 hours of these cases in 2022 -2024 to form a 3 -year hourly dataset (totally  26280  samples 

in time) for the AE reconstruction training . The  architecture  design  and  training process  are  described in details by  Text S2 .3

and S 2.4 . It ’s worth to mention that in this case, pursuing 1 km resolution high -precision expression, we particularly concern 

local small scale information, and therefore we set a relatively large latent_dim (196608) with only a reduction rate of roug hly 

25%. 

In this test case, we only assimilate the surface observations as shown in  Figs.  9b-c. We first show the reconstruction accuracy. 

As examples, the reconstructed  moisture (q 1), temperature (T 1) and  surface wind (u 1, v 1) fields  are shown in  Figs.  10 , which 

are randomly drawn from a 1 -month validation dataset of June 20  - July 20, 2025, for which we will conduct parallel MSHea -

EnKF and  AI  L3DV ar  experiments using H f2p MDA -WRF DA  in D03.  Fig ure  10  show s that t he reconstructed fields reproduce 

the main spatial structures of the original normalized fields. The error maps  (next -right column)  show that reconstruction errors 

are generally small and spatially localized. The spectra  (most -right column)  further indicate that the reconstructed fields 

preserve the main spectral distribution of the original fields, although weak high -wavenumber smoothing remains. 23 

Fig ure  10 : Reconstruction of WRF D03 first model -level wind variables in the AE latent space. Rows show  𝐪 𝟏  , 𝐓 𝟏  , 𝐮 𝟏  and  𝐯 𝟏  .

Columns show the original normalized field, the reconstructed field decoded from the latent vector, the reconstruction error  and 

the radially averaged power spectrum of the original and reconstructed fields. The sample is taken from 00:00 UTC 23 June 202 5. 

The validation metrics are summarized in  Table 2 . The total SSIM is 0.9966, indicating that the AE reconstruction retains the 

spatial structure of the D03 near -surface variables. The small RMSE and MAE values further show that the reconstruction 

error is limited after normalization. These results sugges t that the trained latent representation is sufficiently accurate for the 

following D03 latent -space assimilation experiment. 24       

> Table 2. Validation -set reconstruction metrics for WRF D03 near -surface variables in the AE latent space. The metrics are calculated
> from 2183 validation samples after variable normalization. “Total” denotes the metric averaged over 𝐪 𝟏 ,𝐓 𝟏 ,𝐮 𝟏 and 𝐯 𝟏 .

Variables  MSE  MAE  RMSE  SSIM  PSNR 

q1 0.00018  0.0089  0.0127  0.9968  40.68 

T1 0.00028  0.0107  0.0164  0.9989  42.91 

u1 0.00387  0.0335  0.0597  0.9952  42.52 

v1 0.00298  0.0314  0.0528  0.9954  42.76 

Total  0.00183  0.0211  0.0427  0.9966  42.60 

5.3.2  Latent -space evaluation and  𝐁 𝒛 -related correlation diagnosis 

The latent -space correlation structure is also examined for the WRF D03 application. This diagnosis is used to evaluate whether 

the latent variables provide a weakly correlated control space for L3DVar. As in the CM2 case, the purpose  is  to assess whether 

a simplified  𝐁 𝑧  is acceptable for the present demonstration. 

Figure 1 1 shows the latent -space correlation diagnostics for the trained WRF AE. Both the channel -correlation and 

representative spatial -correlation matrices are strongly dominated by their diagonal elements. Compared with the CM2 case, 

the off -diagonal structures  are weaker, which indicates a stronger decorrelation in the WRF latent representation. The off -

diagonal correlation distribution is sharply peaked around zero, and 95% of absolute off -diagonal correlations are smaller than 

about 0.117.  This result supports the use of a simplified latent -space  𝐁 𝑧  in the D03 LDA experiment. 

> Figure 1 1. Latent -space correlation diagnosis for the WRF D03 AE representation. (a) Correlation matrix among latent channels.
> (b) Spatial correlation matrix for a representative latent channel. (c) Probability density distribution of off -diagonal correlation
> coeff icients. The dashed vertical lines mark the 95% range of absolute off -diagonal correlations.

25 

5.3.3  The  FS DA results in D03 

Once the latent space AE is trained, the  minimization  in the latent space can be conducted with the Lidar observations in the 

D03 to carry  out L3DVar. W e insert the  L3DVar  into the  WRF DA  system under  Hf2p MDA  to  replace the D03 DA procedure 

form  Hf2p MDA -WRF FSD A system.  Setting an optional switch , we can perform DA experiments with classic multiscale  WRF DA 

and new L 3DVar -WRF FSDA  within the H f2p MDA -WRF FSD A framework in a parallel fashion.  We insert the AE encoder and 

decoder trained in  Text S2.3 and S2.4  and employ the latent space minimization described in  Text S3  to replace the D03 DA 

procedure. In this way, we can perform DA experiments with classic multiscale MSHea -EnKF and new  AI L3DVar  within the 

Hf2p MDA -WRF DA  framework in a parallel fashion.  With the observational error as 1 m/s (for wind), 1  oC (for atmospheric 

temperature),  we run the system from 00UTC 21 June 2025 to 00UTC July 21 2025 with initial and boundary conditions 

remapped from ERA5 reanalysis, in which the WRF model with 9/3 (1) km resolutions in D01/D02 (D03) assimilate s

conventional surface station (Lidar) observations shown in  Fig s. 9b-c. We first show the distribution of analysis increments at 

the first step assimilation in  Fig.  12 . We see very local u 1 and v 1 adjustments that distribute around Lidar locations ( Fig s. 12a-

b), and although the Lidar only provides wind measurements in this case, the moisture  and  temperature  also get consistent 

adjustments ( Fig s. 1 2c-d) under this AE -LDA multivariate nonlinear assimilation framework. 

Fig ure  12: The distributions of analysis increments (the analysis minus the first guess from background) of the first model level  a)

u-component  𝐮 𝟏  and  b) v -component  𝐯 𝟏  and  c) temperature  𝐓 𝟏  as well as  d) specific humidity  𝐪 𝟏  at the minimization  equilibrium 

point of the first assimilation step in D03 L 3DVar  of  Hf2p MDA -WRF FSD A. The H f2p MDA -WRF FSD A system is run from 2025 -06 -21 

0000Z  to 2025 -07 -21 0000Z  with initial and boundary conditions remapped from ERA5 reanalysis. The black asterisks denote the 

locations of 8 Lidars . The red asterisk denotes the Lidar location that is used for the evaluation of L3DVar FSDA in Fig. 13. 26 

Then, we present the time series of RMSEs of the first model level (near surface) u -component (called u 1) and v -component 

(called v 1) produced by the classic multiscale DA (denoted by MDA) and new  AI  L3DVar  (denoted by LDA) in  Fig. 1 3.

Within the H f2p MDA -WRF DA  it is very convenient to perform traditional DA and newly -developed AI  L3DVar  in a parallel 

fashion. We see that except for the period of  06 00Z -10 00Z 21  June  2025 , in most of the time, both the MDA and L 3DVar 

reduce the RMSEs from the CTL.  As an average in the whole assimilation period, the u 1’s RMSE of  L3DVar  is improved by 

2% from the traditional MDA (the RMSEs of CTL, MDA, L3DVar are 2.78, 2.46 and 2.41, respectively).  However, we also 

see that the  L3DVar’s v 1 gives equivalent results of classic MDA  (the RMSEs of CTL, MDA, L3DVar are 3.31, 2.92 and 2.93, 

respectively) . Since the model version used in this study does still not resolve turbulence -featured extreme events (1 km 

horizontal resolution and 100 m vertical resolution in planetary boundary layer in this case), when one of 8 Lidars measures 

out a local gust event  at 06UTC -10UTC 21 June,  neither MDA  nor L 3DVar  does not capture this event. This leads to large 

RMSEs during this period for all of CTL, MDA and L 3DVar . Future  studies will first detect the sensitivities of these DA 

schemes on model horizontal and vertical resolutions, and then perform deep research on  L3DVar  to get optimal results, 

serving for low -altitude economy environment safety insurance.            

> Fig ure 13:The time series of root mean squared errors (RMSEs) of the first model level u -component (u 1) and v -component v 1in
> free model control simulation (CTL) (blue), and multiscale high -efficient approximate filter (MSHea -EnKF) data assimilation (MDA,
> orange ) as well as AE latent data assimilation (LDA, green) produced by Hf2pMDA -WRF FSD Ain the D03 domain. Both MDA and
> LDA experiments are conducted under the configuration of multi -layer nested downscaling shown in Fig. 9ain which the WRF
> model with 9/3 (1) km resolutions in D01/D02 (D03) assimilate sconventional surface station (Lidar) observations shown in Fig s.9b-
> c. What are shown here are the results of the first two days in the one month test period o f2025 -06 -21 0000Z to 2025 -07 -21 0000Z
> for a Lidar location denoted by a red asterisk in Fig. 12 .

27 

We use  Fig. 14  to show that although we only assimilate the surface wind measurements by Lidar into the downscaled model, 

the online FSDA system is able to propagate the surface observational information vertically to constrain the model. While th e

surface -only  L3DVar makes difference from the classic MDA ( panel  a), the small surface absolute error can impact on other 

model levels gradually ( panels  b-g). However, this surface -only observational constraint is clearly insufficient and follow -up 

studies shall use the profiles measured by Lidar to gain more vertical observational constraints.                     

> Fig ure 14:Vertical structures of atmospheric wind u -component .(a) Locations of the lidar sites. The selected lidar site is marked
> by the red asterisk (the same Lidar denoted by a red asterisk in Fig. 12) , and the black line indicates the radial transect used for the
> vertical cross -sections in panels (d –g). (b) Time –height distribution of the L 3DVar minus MDA difference at the selected Lidar site.
> (c) Time –height distribution of difference sof u-component ’s absolute error of L3DVar minus MDA. The colored markers below
> panel s(b) and (c) indicate the time sn apshot s corresponding to the cross -sections in panels (d –g). (d –g) Vertical cross -sections of u-
> component ’s difference of L3DVar minus MDA along the radial transect at (d) 0010 Z, (e) 0100 Z, (f) 0150 Z, and (g) 0240 Zon 2025 -
> 06 -21 .

6 Summary and discussions 

Based on the  F2PY  protocol, a Fortran -Python hybrid programming infrastructure platform called H f2p MDA has been 

developed for deep incorporation of AI and scientific modeling and data assimilation. In this H f2p MDA framework, any Python -

coded (Fortran -coded) AI (scientific) algorithm (scheme) can be used by a scientific modeling and data assimilation module 28 

(machine learning procedure). As two typical application examples of H f2p MDA, the implementations with a coupled global 

climate model CM2 with modularized Fortran structures and a multi -layer nesting downscaling weather model WRF featured 

as recursive Fortran integration, have been presented in details. The CM2 ’s (WRF ’s) H f2p MDA implementation establishes a 

nonlinear strongly -coupled (high -precision) climate (weather) data assimilation system called  Hf2p MDA -CM2 SC DA  (H f2p MDA -

WRF FSD A). Test results of  Hf2p MDA -CM2 SC DA  (H f2p MDA -WRF FSD A) show that while the H f2p MDA conveniently inserts an AI 

latent DA algorithm into the CM2 CDA  (WRF DA ) system and fulfills global strongly -CDA (regional high -precision DA), it 

readily improves the assimilation quality from a traditional DA method. Except for deeply evaluating scientific values in 

Hf2p MDA -CM2 SCD A and H f2p MDA -WRF FSD A, follow -up studies also include incorporating more advanced AI DA algorithms 

into H f2p MDA, for example, the generative assimilation and prediction (GAP) (Yang et al., 2025) based on image recognition 

technology. 

More generally, the H f2p MDA designed in this study is a high ly  efficient infrastructure platform for deep  incorporation of AI 

and science since it only requires minimum change s on legacy Fortran codes of sciences that have a long persistently -

developing history. Following the procedure of H f2p MDA, on the one hand, it is feasible to incorporate data -driven machine 

deep learning algorithms to improve scientific modeling  to fulfill “AI for science .” For example, there are urgent demands of 

new parameterization schemes for high -resolution (HR) Earth system model (e .g. Chang et al., 2020) or even resolving the 

challenging problems of HR Earth system modeling (e.g. Gou et al., 2025). On the other hand, the rich achievements on 

scientific modeling from long time development over more than a half century since 1950s can  directly advance development 

of science -guided AI algorithms (e.g. Hao et al., 2025)  to advance  “science for AI .” In that sense, while the H f2p MDA has a 

very wide scope of applications, it requires more efforts to optimize its structure and deepen its infrastructure development  so 

that it can be more conveniently plugged in any a pplication  scenario .

Code and data availability 

The original ERA5 dataset (Hersbach et al., 2020) can be obtained from  https://doi.org/10.24381/cds.adbb2d47 .

The original OISST v2.1 sea surface temperature dataset (Huang et al., 2021) can be obtained from 

https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/optimum -interpolation -sst .

The CM2.1 model (Delworth et al., 2006 b) can be obtained from  https://github.com/mom -ocean/MOM5  and the CM2.1 model 

version with DA modules is also archived on Zenodo ( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18883209 ; Delworth et al., 2006 a). 

The Weather Research and Forecasting model version 3.7.1 (WRF v3.7.1; Skamarock et al., 2008) can be obtained from 

https://www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/download/get_source.html. The exact version used in this study has also been archived 

to ensure reproduci bility and long -term accessibility ( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19271007 ; University Corporation for 

Atmospheric Research and NSF National Center for Atmospheric Research, 2015). 29 

The model code for Hf2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  and Hf2p MDA -WRF FSDA  developed in this study is archived at 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 20710848  (Zhu et al., 2026b). The datasets used in the experiments, including the observation 

data and the exact ERA5 and OISST data used in this study, are archived at  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19272242  (Zhu et 

al., 2026a). 

Author contributions 

XZ  and  ZLin  are co -first authors who contributed equally to this work. Both of them conduct all test work on Python -Fortran 

hybrid programming as well as AE and latent minimization and join the paper edits.  SZ  is the c orresponding author  who 

proposes the idea, designs and organizes the research project, writes and edits the paper.  ZLu  participate d the test experiments 

on WRF multiscale data assimilation and joins the discussions.  SW  and  XH  manage the Leice Transient team and OUC team 

respectively, and join the discussions and make comments on the research work.  ZX  participate d the test experiments on WRF 

AE training experiments and joins the discussions.  ZR, JL, JX, YG, RH, XY , ML  and GL  contribute to this research by joining 

the discussions and making comments on the research and manuscript. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgement s

This work is supported by the Science and Technology Innovation Project of Laoshan Laboratory under Grant s (Nos. 

LSKJ202300400, LSKJ202300401 -03, LSKJ202202200, LSKJ202202201 -04), the National Natural Science Foundation of 

China (42361164616), the Shandong Province’s “Taishan” Scientist Program (ts201712017) .

Review statement 

The review statement will be added by Copernicus Publications listing the handling editor as well as all contributing referee s

according to their  status  anonym ous or identified .30 

References 

Arnold, C., Sharma, S., Weigel, T., and Greenberg, D. S.: Efficient and stable coupling of the SuperdropNet deep -learning -

based cloud microphysics (v0.1.0) with the ICON climate and weather model (v2.6.5), Geosci. Model Dev., 17, 4017 –4029, 

https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -17 -4017 -2024 , 2024. 

Atkinson, J., Elafrou, A., Kasoar, E., Wallwork, J. G., Meltzer, T., Clifford, S., Orchard, D., and Edsall, C.: FTorch: a lib rary 

for coupling PyTorch  models to Fortran, JOSS, 10, 7602,  https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07602 , 2025. 

Banerjee, C., Nguyen, K., Fookes, C., and Raissi, M.: A survey on physics informed reinforcement learning: Review and open 

problems, Expert Systems with Applications, 287, 128166,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.128166 , 2025. 

Benjamin, S. G., Brown, J. M., Brunet, G., Lynch, P., Saito, K., and Schlatter, T. W.: 100 Years of Progress in Forecasting 

and NWP Applications, Meteorological Monographs, 59, 13.1 -13.67,  https://doi.org/10.1175/AMSMONOGRAPHS -D-18 -

0020.1 , 2019. 

Bi, K., Xie, L., Zhang, H., Chen, X., Gu, X., and Tian, Q.: Accurate medium -range global weather forecasting with 3D neural 

networks, Nature, 619, 533 –538,  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -023 -06185 -3, 2023. 

Chang, P., Zhang, S., Danabasoglu, G., Yeager, S. G., Fu, H., Wang, H., Castruccio, F. S., Chen, Y., Edwards, J., Fu, D., Jia ,

Y., Laurindo, L. C., Liu, X., Rosenbloom, N., Small, R. J., Xu, G., Zeng, Y., Zhang, Q., Bacmeister, J., Bailey, D. A., Duan, 

X.,  DuVivier , A. K., Li, D., Li, Y., Neale, R., Stö ssel, A., Wang, L., Zhuang, Y., Baker, A., Bates, S., Dennis, J., Diao, X., 

Gan, B., Gopal, A., Jia, D., Jing, Z., Ma, X., Saravanan, R., Strand, W. G., Tao, J., Yang, H., Wang, X., Wei, Z., and Wu, L. :

An Unprecedent ed Set of High‐Resolution Earth System Simulations for Understanding Multiscale Interactions in Climate 

Variability and Change, J Adv Model Earth Syst, 12, e2020MS002298,  https://doi.org/10.1029/2020MS002298 , 2020. 

Cheng, S., Prentice, I. C., Huang, Y., Jin, Y., Guo, Y. -K., and Arcucci, R.: Data -driven surrogate model with latent data 

assimilation: Application to wildfire forecasting, Journal of Computational Physics, 464, 111302, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111302 , 2022. 

Cheng, S., Zhuang, Y., Kahouadji, L., Liu, C., Chen, J., Matar, O. K., and Arcucci , R.: Multi -domain encoder –decoder neural 

networks for latent data assimilation in dynamical systems, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 430, 

117201,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2024.117201 , 2024. 

Clough, S. A., Shephard, M. W., Mlawer, E. J., Delamere, J. S., Iacono, M. J., Cady -Pereira, K., Boukabara , S., and Brown, 

P. D.: Atmospheric radiative transfer modeling: a summary of the AER codes, Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and 

Radiative Transfer, 91, 233 –244,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jqsrt.2004.05.058 , 2005. 

Danabasoglu, G., Lamarque, J. ‐F., Bacmeister, J., Bailey, D. A., DuVivier , A. K., Edwards, J., Emmons, L. K., Fasullo, J., 

Garcia, R., Gettelman, A., Hannay, C., Holland, M. M., Large, W. G., Lauritzen, P. H., Lawrence, D. M., Lenaerts, J. T. M., 

Lindsay, K., Lipscomb, W. H., Mills, M. J., Neale, R., Oleson, K. W., Otto‐Bliesne r, B., Phillips, A. S., Sacks, W., Tilmes, S., 

Van Kampenhout, L., Vertenstein, M., Bertini, A., Dennis, J., Deser , C., Fischer, C., Fox‐Kemper, B., Kay, J. E., Kinnison, 

D., Kushner, P. J., Larson, V. E., Long, M. C., Mickelson, S., Moore, J. K., Nienhouse, E., Polvani, L., Rasch, P. J., and St rand, 31 

W. G.: The Community Earth System Model Version 2 (CESM2), J Adv Model Earth Syst, 12, e2019MS001916, 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2019MS001916 , 2020. 

Randall, D. A., Wood, R. A., Bony, S., Colman, R., Fichefet, T., Fyfe, J., Kattsov , V., Pitman, A., Shukla, J., Srinivasan, J., 

Stouffer, R. J., Sumi, A., and Taylor, K. E.: Climate Models and Their Evaluation, in: Climate Change 2007: The Physical 

Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Int ergovernmental Panel on Climate 

Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)], Cambridge 

University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 589 –662, n.d. 

De Rosnay, P., Browne, P., De Boissé son, E., Fairbairn, D., Hirahara, Y., Ochi, K., Schepers, D., Weston, P., Zuo, H., Alonso ‐

Balmaseda, M., Balsamo, G., Bonavita, M., Borman, N., Brown, A., Chrust, M., Dahoui, M., Chiara, G., English, S., Geer, A., 

Healy,  S., Hersbach, H., Laloyaux, P., Magnusson, L., Massart, S., McNally, A., Pappenberger, F., and Rabier, F.: Coupled 

data assimilation at ECMWF: current status, challenges and future developments, Quart J Royal Meteoro Soc, 148, 2672 –

2702,  https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.4330 , 2022. 

Delworth, T. L., Broccoli, A. J., Rosati, A., Stouffer, R. J., Balaji, V., Cooke, W. F., Dixon, K. W., Dunne, J., Dunne, K. A ., 

Durachta, J. W., Findell, K. L., Ginoux, P., Gnanadesikan, A., Gordon, C. T., Griffies, S. M., Gudgel, R., Harrison, M. J., H eld ,

I. M., Hemler, R. S., Langenhorst, A. R., Lee, H. -C., Lin, S. -J., Lu, J., Malyshev, S. L., Milly, P. C. D., Ramaswamy, V., 

Russell, J., Schwarzkopf, M. D., Shevliakova , E., Sirutis, J. J., Spelman, M. J., Stern, W. F., Winton, M., Wittenberg, A. T., 

Wyman, B., Zeng, F., and Zhang, R.: CM2.1 Model, ,  https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.18883209 , 2006a. 

Delworth, T. L., Broccoli, A. J., Rosati, A., Stouffer, R. J., Balaji, V., Beesley, J. A., Cooke, W. F., Dixon, K. W., Dunne,  J., 

Dunne, K. A., Durachta, J. W., Findell, K. L., Ginoux, P., Gnanadesikan , A., Gordon, C. T., Griffies, S. M., Gudgel, R., 

Harrison, M. J., Held, I. M., Hemler, R. S., Horowitz, L. W., Klein, S. A., Knutson, T. R., Kushner, P. J., Langenhorst, A. R ., 

Lee, H. -C., Lin, S. -J., Lu, J., Malyshev, S. L., Milly, P. C. D., Ramaswamy, V ., Russell, J., Schwarzkopf, M. D., Shevliakova, 

E., Sirutis , J. J., Spelman, M. J., Stern, W. F., Winton, M., Wittenberg, A. T., Wyman, B., Zeng, F., and Zhang, R.: GFDL’s 

CM2 Global Coupled Climate Models. Part I: Formulation and Simulation Characteristics, Journal of Climate, 19, 643 –674, 

https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI3629.1 , 2006b. 

Diao, X., Stö ssel, A., Chang, P., Danabasoglu , G., Yeager, S. G., Gopal, A., Wang, H., and Zhang, S.: On the Intermittent 

Occurrence of Open‐Ocean Polynyas in a Multi‐Century High‐Resolution Preindustrial Earth System Model Simulation, JGR 

Oceans, 127, e2021JC017672,  https://doi.org/10.1029/2021JC017672 , 2022. 

Eyring, V., Bony, S., Meehl, G. A., Senior, C. A., Stevens, B., Stouffer, R. J., and Taylor, K. E.: Overview of the Coupled 

Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) experimental design and organization, Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937 –1958, 

https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -9-1937 -2016 , 2016. 

Fan, H., Liu, Y., Huo, Z., Liu, Y., Shi, Y., and Li, Y.: A Novel Latent Space Data Assimilation Framework with Autoencoder -

Observation to Latent Space (AE -O2L) Network. Part I: The Observation -Only Analysis Method, Monthly Weather Review, 

153, 1335 –1348,  https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR -D-24 -0057.1 , 2025a. 32 

Fan, H., Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Huo, Z., Chen, B., and Qin, Y.: A Novel Latent Space Data Assimilation Framework with 

Autoencoder -Observation to Latent Space (AE -O2L) Network. Part II: Observation and Background Assimilation with 

Interpretability, Monthly Weath er Review, 153, 1349 –1363,  https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR -D-24 -0058.1 , 2025b. 

Fan, H., Bai, L., Fei, B., Xiao, Y., Chen, K., Liu, Y., Qu, Y., Ling, F., and Gentine , P.: Physically consistent global atmospheric 

data assimilation with machine learning in latent space, Sci. Adv., 12, eaea4248,  https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aea4248 , 2026. 

Faroughi, S. A., Pawar, N. M., Fernandes, C., Raissi , M., Das, S., Kalantari, N. K., and Kourosh Mahjour, S.: Physics -Guided, 

Physics -Informed, and Physics -Encoded Neural Networks and Operators in Scientific Computing: Fluid and Solid Mechanics, 

Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering, 2 4, 040802,  https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4064449 , 2024. 

Feng, J., Zhang, Y., Cheng, Q., and Tsou, J. Y.: Pan -Arctic melt pond fraction trend, variability, and contribution to sea ice 

changes, Global and Planetary Change, 217, 103932,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2022.103932 , 2022. 

Gnanadesikan , A., Dixon, K. W., Griffies, S. M., Balaji, V., Barreiro, M., Beesley, J. A., Cooke, W. F., Delworth, T. L., Gerdes, 

R., Harrison, M. J., Held, I. M., Hurlin, W. J., Lee, H. -C., Liang, Z., Nong, G., Pacanowski, R. C., Rosati, A., Russell, J., 

Samuels, B.  L., Song, Q., Spelman, M. J., Stouffer, R. J., Sweeney, C. O., Vecchi, G., Winton, M., Wittenberg, A. T., Zeng, 

F., Zhang, R., and Dunne, J. P.: GFDL’s CM2 Global Coupled Climate Models. Part II: The Baseline Ocean Simulation, 

Journal of Climate, 19, 675 –697,  https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI3630.1 , 2006. 

Gou, R., Lohmann, G., Chen, D., Xu, S., Shu, R., Zhang, S., and Wu, L.: Cracking the Code of Arctic Sea Ice: Why Models 

Fail to Predict Its Retreat?,  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.04961 , 7 November 2025. 

Haarsma, R. J., Roberts, M. J., Vidale, P. L., Senior, C. A., Bellucci, A., Bao, Q., Chang, P., Corti, S., Fučkar, N. S., Gue mas ,

V., Von Hardenberg, J., Hazeleger, W., Kodama, C., Koenigk, T., Leung, L. R., Lu, J., Luo, J. -J., Mao, J., Mizielinski, M. S., 

Mizuta, R., Nobre, P., Satoh, M., Scoccimarro, E., Semmler, T., Small, J., and Von Storch, J. -S.: High Resolution Model 

Interco mparison Project (HighResMIP v1.0) for CMIP6, Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 4185 –4208,  https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -9-

4185 -2016 , 2016. 

Hä fner, D., Jacobsen, R. L., Eden, C., Kristensen, M. R. B., Jochum, M.,  Nuterman, R., and Vinter, B.: Veros v0.1  – a fast and 

versatile ocean simulator in pure Python, Geosci. Model Dev., 11, 3299 –3312,  https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -11 -3299 -2018 ,

2018. 

Ham, Y. -G., Kim, J. -H., and Luo, J. -J.: Deep learning for multi -year ENSO forecasts, Nature, 573, 568 –572, 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -019 -1559 -7, 2019. 

Han, Y., Zhang, G. J., Huang, X., and Wang, Y.: A Moist Physics Parameterization Based on Deep Learning, J Adv Model 

Earth Syst, 12, e2020MS002076,  https://doi.org/10.1029/2020MS002076 , 2020. 

Hao, R., Zhao, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, G., and Deng, X.: Interpretable Cross -Sphere Multiscale Deep Learning Predicts ENSO 

Skilfully Beyond 2 Years,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2503.21211 , 2025. 

Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., Van Der Walt, S. J., Gommers, R., Virtanen, P., Cournapeau, D., Wieser, E., Taylor, J., Berg,  S., 

Smith, N. J., Kern, R., Picus, M., Hoyer, S., Van Kerkwijk, M. H., Brett, M., Haldane, A., Del Rí o, J. F., Wiebe, M., Peterso n, 33 

P., Gé rard -Marchant, P., Sheppard, K., Reddy, T., Weckesser, W., Abbasi, H., Gohlke, C., and Oliphant, T. E.: Array 

programming with NumPy, Nature, 585, 357 –362,  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -020 -2649 -2, 2020. 

Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., Hirahara, S., Horányi, A., Muñoz‐Sabater, J., Nicolas, J., Peubey, C., Radu, R., Sche pers, 

D., Simmons, A., Soci, C., Abdalla, S., Abellan, X., Balsamo, G., Bechtold, P., Biavati, G., Bidlot, J., Bonavita, M., De Chi ara, 

G., Dahlgren, P., Dee, D., Diamantakis, M., Dragani, R., Flemming, J., Forbes, R., Fuentes, M., Geer, A., Haimberger, L., 

Healy, S., Hogan, R. J., Hó lm, E., Janisková , M., Keeley, S., Laloyaux , P., Lopez, P., Lupu, C., Radnoti, G., De Rosnay, P., 

Rozum, I., Vamborg, F., Villaume, S., and Thé paut, J.: The ERA5 global reanalysis, Quart J Royal Meteoro Soc, 146, 1999 –

2049,  https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3803 , 2020. 

Heuer, H., Schwabe, M., Gentine, P., Giorgetta, M. A., and Eyring, V.: Interpretable Multiscale Machine Learning‐Based 

Parameterizations of Convection for ICON, J Adv Model Earth Syst, 16, e2024MS004398, 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2024MS004398 , 2024. 

Hinton, G. E. and Salakhutdinov, R. R.: Reducing the Dimensionality of Data with Neural Networks, Science, 313, 504 –507, 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1127647 , 2006. 

Hong, S. -Y., Dudhia, J., and Chen, S. -H.: A Revised Approach to Ice Microphysical Processes for the Bulk Parameterization 

of Clouds and Precipitation, Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 103 –120,  https://doi.org/10.1175/1520 -

0493(2004)132%253C0103:ARATIM%253E2.0.CO;2 , 2004. 

Hopfield, J. J.: Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sc i. 

U.S.A., 79, 2554 –2558,  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554 , 1982. 

Hu, X., Klein, P. M., and Xue, M.: Evaluation of the updated YSU planetary boundary layer scheme within WRF for wind 

resource and air quality assessments, JGR Atmospheres, 118,  https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50823 , 2013. 

Huang, B., Liu, C., Banzon, V., Freeman, E., Graham, G., Hankins, B., Smith, T., and Zhang, H. -M.: Improvements of the 

Daily Optimum Interpolation Sea Surface Temperature (DOISST) Version 2.1, Journal of Climate, 34, 2923 –2939, 

https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI -D-20 -0166.1 , 2021. 

Jia, W. and Zhang, X.: The role of the planetary boundary layer parameterization schemes on the meteorological and aerosol 

pollution simulations: A review, Atmospheric Research, 239, 104890,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2020.104890 , 2020. 

Joule, J. P.: On the calorific effects of magneto -electricity, and on the mechanical value of heat, The London, Edinburgh, and 

Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 23, 263 –276,  https://doi.org/10.1080/14786444308644730 , 1843. 

Kadivar, M., Tormey, D., and McGranaghan, G.: A review on turbulent flow over rough surfaces: Fundamentals and theories, 

International Journal of Thermofluids, 10, 100077,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijft.2021.100077 , 2021. 

Kain, J. S.: The Kain –Fritsch Convective Parameterization: An Update, J. Appl. Meteor., 43, 170 –181, 

https://doi.org/10.1175/1520 -0450(2004)043%253C0170:TKCPAU%253E2.0.CO;2 , 2004. 

Kay, J. E., Deser, C., Phillips, A., Mai, A., Hannay, C., Strand, G., Arblaster, J. M., Bates, S. C., Danabasoglu , G., Edwards, 

J., Holland, M., Kushner, P., Lamarque, J. -F., Lawrence, D., Lindsay, K., Middleton, A., Munoz, E., Neale, R., Oleson, K., 

Polvani, L., and Vertenstein, M.: The Community Earth System Model (CESM) Large Ensemble Project: A Community 34 

Resource for Studying Climate Change in the Presence of Internal Climate Variability, Bulletin of the American 

Meteorological Society, 96, 1333 –1349,  https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS -D-13 -00255.1 , 2015. 

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980 , 2014. 

Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M.: Auto -Encoding Variational Bayes,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1312.6114 , 2013. 

Kochkov, D., Yuval, J., Langmore, I., Norgaard, P., Smith, J., Mooers, G., Klö wer, M., Lottes, J., Rasp, S., Dü ben , P., Hatfield, 

S., Battaglia, P., Sanchez -Gonzalez, A., Willson, M., Brenner, M. P., and Hoyer, S.: Neural general circulation models for 

weather and climate, Nature, 632, 1060 –1066,  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -024 -07744 -y, 2024. 

Ladwig, B.: wrf -python, , 5 MB,  https://doi.org/10.5065/D6W094P1 , 2017. 

Lin, S. -J.: A “Vertically Lagrangian ” Finite -Volume Dynamical Core for Global Models, Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 2293 –2307, 

https://doi.org/10.1175/1520 -0493(2004)132%253C2293:AVLFDC%253E2.0.CO;2 , 2004. 

Lin, Z.: A High -Efficiency Paleoclimate Reconstruction Approach by Online Strongly -Coupled Data Assimilation in Latent 

Space, Climate Dynamics, under review, 2025. 

Lu, L., Zhang, S., Jiang, Y., Yu, X., Li, M., Chen, Y., Chang, P., Danabasoglu , G., Liu, Z., Zhu, C., Lin, X., and Wu, L.: An 

Improved Coupled Data Assimilation System with a CGCM Using Multi -Time -Scale High -Efficiency EnOI -Like Filtering, 

Journal of Climate, 36, 6045 –6067,  https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI -D-22 -0558.1 , 2023. 

Marotzke, J.: From theory to RAPID AMOC observations: a personal voyage of discovery, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A., 381, 

20220192,  https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2022.0192 , 2023. 

Mayer, J. R.: Bemerkungen über die Krä fte der unbelebten Natur, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 42, 233 –240, 

https://doi.org/10.1002/jlac.18420420212 , 1842. 

McGibbon, J., Brenowitz, N. D., Cheeseman, M., Clark, S. K., Dahm, J. P. S., Davis, E. C., Elbert, O. D., George, R. C., Harr is, 

L. M., Henn, B., Kwa, A., Perkins, W. A., Watt -Meyer, O., Wicky, T. F., Bretherton, C. S., and Fuhrer, O.: fv3gfs -wrapper: a 

Py thon wrapper of the FV3GFS atmospheric model, Geosci. Model Dev., 14, 4401 –4409,  https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -14 -

4401 -2021 , 2021. 

Melinc, B. and Zaplotnik , Ž.: 3D‐Var data assimilation using a variational autoencoder, Quart J Royal Meteoro Soc, 150, 

2273 –2295,  https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.4708 , 2024. 

Mouallem, J., Gao, K., Reichl, B. G., Chilutti, L., Harris, L., Benson, R., Zadeh, N., Chen, J., Chen, J. -H., and Zhang, C.: 

Development of a high -resolution coupled SHiELD -MOM6 model  – Part 1: Model overview, coupling technique, and 

validation in a region al setup, Geosci. Model Dev., 18, 6461 –6478,  https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -18 -6461 -2025 , 2025. 

Mü ller, S., Lange, M., Fischer, T., Kö nig, S., Kelbling, M., Leal Rojas, J. J., and Thober, S.: FINAM is not a model (v1.0):  a

new Python -based model coupling framework, Geosci. Model Dev., 18, 4483 –4498,  https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -18 -4483 -

2025 , 2025. 

Newton, I.: Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, Jussu Societatis Regiae ac Typis  Josephi Streater. Prostat apud plures 

bibliopolas,  https://doi.org/10.5479/sil.52126.39088015628399 , 1687. 35 

O’Gorman, P. A. and Dwyer, J. G.: Using Machine Learning to Parameterize Moist Convection: Potential for Modeling of 

Climate, Climate Change, and Extreme Events, J Adv Model Earth Syst, 10, 2548 –2563, 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2018MS001351 , 2018. 

Parrish, D. F. and Derber, J. C.: The National Meteorological Center’s Spectral Statistical -Interpolation Analysis System, Mon. 

Wea. Rev., 120, 1747 –1763,  https://doi.org/10.1175/1520 -0493(1992)120%253C1747:TNMCSS%253E2.0.CO;2 , 1992. 

Perlwitz , J., Knutson, T., Kossin, J. P., and LeGrande, A. N.: Ch. 5: Large -Scale Circulation and Climate Variability. Climate 

Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I, U.S. Global Change Research Program, 

https://doi.org/10.7930/J0RV0KVQ , 2017. 

Qu, M., Lei, R., Liu, Y., and Li, N.: Arctic Sea ice leads detected using sentinel -1B SAR image and their responses to 

atmosphere circulation and sea ice dynamics, Remote Sensing of Environment, 308, 114193, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2024.114193 , 2024. 

Ruckstuhl, Y., Janjić, T., and Rasp, S.: Training a convolutional neural network to conserve mass in data assimilation, Nonli n. 

Processes Geophys., 28, 111 –119,  https://doi.org/10.5194/npg -28 -111 -2021 , 2021. 

Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J.: Learning representations by back -propagating errors, Nature, 323, 533 –

536,  https://doi.org/10.1038/323533a0 , 1986. 

Shu, R., Gao, Y., Wu, H., Gou, R., Wang, K., Xiang, Y., Xu, F., Wen, Q., and Huang, X.: Ocean -E2E: Hybrid Physics -Based 

and Data -Driven Global Forecasting of Extreme Marine Heatwaves with End -to -End Neural Assimilation, 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.22071 , 15 August 2025. 

Skamarock, W., Klemp, J., Dudhia, J., Gill, D., Barker, D., Wang, W., Huang, X. -Y., and Duda, M.: A Description of the 

Advanced Research WRF Version 3, UCAR/NCAR,  https://doi.org/10.5065/D68S4MVH , 2008. 

Sun, J. -A., Fan, H., Gong, J., Fei, B., Chen, K., Ling, F., Zhang, W., Xu, W., Yan, L., Gentine, P., and Bai, L.: Align -DA: 

Align Score -based Atmospheric Data Assimilation with Multiple Preferences,  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.22008 , 28 

May 2025. 

Taylor, K. E., Stouffer, R. J., and Meehl, G. A.: An Overview of CMIP5 and the Experiment Design, Bulletin of the American 

Meteorological Society, 93, 485 –498,  https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS -D-11 -00094.1 , 2012. 

University Corporation for Atmospheric Research and NSF National Center for Atmospheric Research: WRF v3.7.1, , 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.19271007 , 2015. 

Virtanen, P., Gommers , R., Oliphant, T. E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, 

W., Bright, J., Van Der Walt, S. J., Brett, M., Wilson, J., Millman, K. J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A. R. J., Jones, E., Kern, R ., 

Larson, E., Carey, C. J. , Polat, İ., Feng, Y., Moore, E. W., VanderPlas, J., Laxalde, D., Perktold, J., Cimrman , R., Henriksen, 

I., Quintero, E. A., Harris, C. R., Archibald, A. M., Ribeiro, A. H., Pedregosa, F., Van Mulbregt, P., SciPy 1.0 Contributors ,

Vijaykumar, A., Bardelli, A. P., Rothberg, A., Hilboll, A., Kloeckner, A., Scopatz, A., Lee, A., Rokem , A., Woods, C. N., 

Fulton, C., Masson, C., Hä ggströ m, C., Fitzgerald, C., Nicholson, D. A., Hagen, D. R., Pasechnik, D. V., Olivetti, E., Martin ,

E., Wieser, E., Silva, F., Lenders, F., Wilhelm, F., Young, G., Price, G. A., Ingold, G. -L., Allen, G. E., Le e, G. R., Audren, H., 36 

Probst, I., Dietrich, J. P., Silterra, J., Webber, J. T., Slavič, J., Nothman, J., Buchner, J., Kulick, J., Schönberger , J. L., De 

Miranda Cardoso, J. V., Reimer, J., Harrington, J., Rodrí guez, J. L. C., Nunez -Iglesias, J., Kuczynski, J., Tritz, K., Thoma, M., 

Newville, M., Kü mmerer, M., Bolingbroke, M., Tartre, M., Pak, M., Smith, N. J., Nowaczyk, N., Shebanov, N., Pavlyk , O., 

Brodtkorb, P. A., Lee, P., McGibbon, R. T., Feldbauer, R., Lewis, S., Tygier, S., Sievert, S., Vigna, S., Peterson, S., More,  S., 

et al.: SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python, Nat Methods, 17, 261 –272, 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592 -019 -0686 -2, 2020. 

Visualization & Analysis Systems Technologies: Geoscience Community Analysis Toolkit: GeoCAT -f2py, ,

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.6654183 , 2023. 

Wahle, K., Staneva, J., and Guenther, H.: Data assimilation of ocean wind waves using Neural Networks. A case study for the 

German Bight, Ocean Modelling, 96, 117 –125,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocemod.2015.07.007 , 2015. 

Wang, J., Zhang, S., Yu, X., Jin, Y., Liu, X., Qi, Y., Yang, G., and Li, M.: A Numerical Study of the Impact of Topography 

on the July 2021 Extreme Rainfall Event in Zhengzhou, China, JGR Atmospheres, 129, e2024JD041332, 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JD041332 , 2024. 

Winton, M.: A Reformulated Three -Layer Sea Ice Model, J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 17, 525 –531, 

https://doi.org/10.1175/1520 -0426(2000)017%253C0525:ARTLSI%253E2.0.CO;2 , 2000. 

Yang, S., Nai, C., Liu, X., Li, W., Chao, J., Wang, J., Wang, L., Li, X., Chen, X., Lu, B., Xiao, Z., Boers, N., Yuan, H., an  d

Pan, B.: Generative assimilation and prediction for weather and climate,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2503.03038 , 2025. 

Yu, X., Zhang, S., Li, J., Lu, L., Liu, Z., Li, M., Yu, H., Han, G., Lin, X., Wu, L., and Chang, P.: A Multi‐Timescale EnOI‐ 

Like High‐Efficiency Approximate Filter for Coupled Model Data Assimilation, J Adv Model Earth Syst, 11, 45 –63, 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2018MS001504 , 2019. 

Yuan, W. -X. and Guo, R.: Physics -guided multistage neural network: A physically guided network for step initial values and 

dispersive shock wave phenomena, Phys. Rev. E, 110, 065307,  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.110.065307 , 2024. 

Yuval, J. and O’Gorman, P. A.: Stable machine -learning parameterization of subgrid processes for climate modeling at a range 

of resolutions, Nat Commun, 11, 3295,  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -17142 -3, 2020. 

Zhang, S. and Anderson, J. L.: Impact of spatially and temporally varying estimates of error covariance on assimilation in a 

simple atmospheric model, Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography, 55, 126, 

https://doi.org/10.3402/tellusa.v55i2.12087 , 2003. 

Zhang, S., Harrison, M. J., Rosati, A., and Wittenberg, A.: System Design and Evaluation of Coupled Ensemble Data 

Assimilation for Global Oceanic Climate Studies, Monthly Weather Review, 135, 3541 –3564, 

https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR3466.1 , 2007. 

Zhang, S., Liu, Z., Zhang, X., Wu, X., Han, G., Zhao, Y., Yu, X., Liu, C., Liu, Y., Wu, S., Lu, F., Li, M., and Deng, X.: 

Coupled data assimilation and parameter estimation in coupled ocean –atmosphere models: a review, Clim Dyn, 54, 5127 –

5144,  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382 -020 -05275 -6, 2020. 37 

Zhang, S., Xu, S., Fu, H., Wu, L., Liu, Z., Gao, Y., Zhao, C., Wan, W., Wan, L., Lu, H., Li, C., Liu, Y., Lv , X., Xie, J., Yu, 

Y., Gu, J., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Ning, C., Fei, Y., Guo, X., Wang, Z., Wang, X., Wang, Z., Qu, B., Li, M., Zhao, H., Jiang, 

Y., Yang, G., Lu, L., Wang, H., An, H., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Ma, W., Yu, F., Xu, J., Lin, X., and Shen, X.: Towa rd Earth 

system modeling with resolved clouds and ocean submesoscales on heterogeneous many -core HPCs, National Science Review, 

10, nwad069,  https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwad069 , 2023. 

Zhang, T., Morcrette , C., Zhang, M., Lin, W., Xie, S., Liu, Y., Van Weverberg, K., and Rodrigues, J.: A Fortran –Python 

interface for integrating machine learning parameterization into earth system models, Geosci. Model Dev., 18, 1917 –1928, 

https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -18 -1917 -2025 , 2025. 

Zhong, X., Ma, Z., Yao, Y., Xu, L., Wu, Y., and Wang, Z.: WRF –ML v1.0: a bridge between WRF v4.3 and machine learning 

parameterizations and its application to atmospheric radiative transfer, Geosci. Model Dev., 16, 199 –209, 

https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd -16 -199 -2023 , 2023. 

Zhu, X., Lin, Z., Lu, Z., Zhang, S., and Wu, S.: Hf2p CM2.1_SCDA & WRF_LDA Dataset, 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.19272242 , 2026a. 

Zhu, X., Lin, Z., Zhang, S., Lu, Z., Wu, S., Hou, X., Xiao, Z., Ren, Z., Li, J., Jing, X., Gao, Y., Hao, R., Yu, X., and Li,  M.: 

Hf2p CM2.1_SCDA and WRF_LDA, ,  https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.20710848 , 2026b. 38 

# Supplementary Information for 

# Python -Fortran Hybrid Programming  to Fuse AI and  Physical 

# Models: Examples of AI -LDA in climate and weather models 

# (Hf2pMDA _v 1.0 )

# Xianrui Zhu 1+, Zikuan Lin 2+, Shaoqing Zhang 2*, Zebin Lu 2, Songhua Wu 3,4, Xiangyun Hou 2, Zhisheng 

# Xiao 3, Zhicheng Ren 3, Ji angyu Li 5, Jing Xu 5, Yang Gao 6, Rixu Hao 7, Xiaolin Yu 2, Mingkui Li 2,

# Guangliang Liu 8

> 1

Chongben Honors College, Ocean University of China, Qingdao , 266100 , Chin a

> 2

Key Laboratory of Physical Oceanography, Ministry of Education , and  Institute for Advanced Ocean Study , and  Frontiers 

Science Center for Deep Ocean Multispheres and Earth System (FDOMES), College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences, 

Ocean University of China, Qingdao , 266100 , China 

> 3

Qingdao Leice Transient Technology Co., Ltd., Qingdao , 266100 , China 

> 4

College of Marine Technology, Ocean Remote Sensing Institute, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China 

> 5

Qingdao Marine and Meteorological Institute, Qingdao , 266100 , China 

> 6

Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science and Ecology, Ministry of Education, Frontiers Science Center for Deep 

Ocean Multispheres and Earth System (FDOMES), Ocean University of China, Qingdao, 266100, China 

> 7

College of Intelligent Systems Science and Engineering, and Engineering Research Center of Navigation Instruments, 

Ministry of Education, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China. 

> 8

State Key Laboratory of Physical Oceanography and Artificial Intelligence, Jinan, China. 

Contents of this file: 

Texts  S1 to  S3

Table s S1 to S2 

Figures  S1 to  S2

References  S1 

Equations S1 to S12 39 

Text S1:  General procedure of  implementation of H f2p MDA 

A general procedure of implementing Python -Fortran hybrid programming  for Deep Incorporation of AI and Physical Models 

and data assimilation  based on  F2PY  (Hf2p MDA ) includes the following 4 steps. 

Step -1:  Environment setting 

In theory, there is no specific environment variable for  F2PY . However, to minimize the interruption of other computation 

tasks to the Python -Fortran modeling development, we strongly recommend to use an environment setting tool such as  conda 

etc. to set an isolated environment for the Python -Fortran hybrid application. We may start from a Python environment by 

typing the command “ conda create  -n f2p y python=3.11 ” and continue to  complete  the  setting  by typing “ conda activate f2p y”

and “ conda install numpy=1.26 ” for follow -ups until necessary, where 3.11 and  1.26  are environment parameters of 

corresponding software. For some non -standardized environment variables only necessary for specific applications, the 

“source ” command is a convenient complementary. Detailed description will be given in specific applications  by  Sec ts.  3 and 

4.

Here is an example of setting  environment for  openmpi  which is an important application of  MPI in  our  Hf2p MDA -CM2 CDA 

and  Hf2p MDA -WRF DA  case s. We need to recompile  openmpi  package with added  “-fPIC ” tag and  “make install ”. Then we 

source  a file of command list containing the following 3 lines to add the  openmpi  application to the environment  myf2p :

export PATH= ”.../openmpi/bin:$PATH ”

export LIBRARY_PATH= ”.../openmpi/lib:$LIBRARY_PATH” 

export LD_LIBRARY_PATH= ”.../openmpi/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH” 

Again, the  openmpi  directory shall be in the specific application directory for H f2p MDA -CM2 CDA  so that this  openmpi  setting 

does NOT influence any other applications. 

Step -2:  Creating of Python -callable Fortran (PCF) modules 

In order to become Python -callable, the existed Fortran codes need to be recompiled with an additional new tag “ -fPIC ” that 

makes the Fortran codes being compiled become Dynamic Link Library (DLL) candidates with a “position independent” 

nature. Once relatively -independent Fortran codes are all recompiled as DLL candidates, they are ready to link with the Python 

main con troller (PMC). 

To minimize complexity of the infrastructure between PMC and PCF modules, a plug -featured Fortran subroutine that well 

organizes the PCF modules and makes a few plug -ins for PMC needs to be  encapsulated with all PCF modules to form a 

signature file that shows a clear structure of such plugs. We use the following command line to initially create a signature  file 

called  appname.pyf :40 

$ f2py app_plugs.F90  -m appname  -h --overwrite -signature appname.pyf 

where  app_plugs.F90  consists of subroutines or functions that organize the PCF modules and serve as the plug -ins of PMC. 

Supposing that there are a few DLL candidates created in the compiling procedure described above called  libapp1.a ,

libapp2.a, ... etc., then, the  encapsulating command looks like a continuous line of the above initial creation line of  appname.pyf 

as: 

$ FC="mpif90" CC="mpicc" CXX="mpicxx" LDSHARED="mpif90" LDFLAGS=" -no -ipo  \

-Wl,  --export -dynamic" f2py  -c appname.pyf app_plugs.F90 libapp1.a  \

libapp2.a ...  -lnetcdf  -L/.../software/netcdf3/lib  -L/.../openmpi/lib  \

--backend distutils 

where the option “ -no -ipo” closes out Interprocedural Optimization to minimize potential uncertainties due to optimization 

cross modules and the option “ -Wl” ensures used functions linked to DLL. Note that here the openmpi/lib also needs to be 

recompiled with the tag “ -fPIC.” Finally, as the above command is normally conducted without any error message, a complete 

DLL file called  appname.cpython -311 -x86_64 -linux -gnu.so  is formed (automatically named by the compiling environment 

parameters), which is a Python -callable D LL “shared object” where all subroutines and functions are callable by PMC. All 

information about the logic structure of  appname.cpython -311 -x86_64 -linux -gnu.so  is recorded in the signature file 

appname.pyf , which will be served as an import name in PMC, also serving as an efficient guideline for constructing PMC. 

Step -3: Creating of  Fortran -callable Python (FCP)  modules 

To let the Fortran codes be able to call Python -coded algorithms, we need an interface (called  callback_python.F90 , for 

instance) that translates the Python external functions into Fortran -callable public subroutines (called  python_algorithm {1,2}

etc., for instance). At the same time, the  app_plug.F90  shall include the definition of these external functions (called 

python_foo {1,2} etc., for instance) which are transported from PMC into Fortran application at plug -ins in  app_plug.F90  as 

arguments. This Fortran interface file  callback_python.F90  shall be compiled with  app_plug.F90  together by going through 

the procedure described  in  Step  2 to join the signature file  appname.pyf . Then , all subroutines  that  represent python algorithms 

can be called in any Fortran application through a normal  “use ” statement .

Step -4: Creating and executing  of Python main control (PMC) program 

A PMC (called  appname_main.py , for instance) shall consist of three important parts: import statements, model integration 

conductor and AI algorithm interface as described  before . The import statements must include  “from  appname  import 

module_list ” (import selected Fortran modules from  appname  defined before) or simply  “import  appname ” to import all 41 

modules in  appname . The import statements may include any necessary modules that are used in PMC such as an MPI module 

which provides process -element identification (PE -id) etc. information, as well as defined AI algorithms and so on .

To minimize Python -recoding for the existed Fortran model, the PMC ’s statements for conducting model integration usually 

remain  as  simple as possible Python AI algorithms are conveniently called by the Fortran model. In the example of climate 

model application of H f2p MDA, which will be described in  Sec t.  4, we implement an AI strongly -coupled data assimilation 

(SCDA) based on the existed Fortran -coded weakly -coupled data assimilation (WCDA). Due to the strongly -modular nature 

of  existed  Fortran codes, the AI algorithm trained by deep -learning is conveniently inserted  at  the atmosphere -ocean  interface ,

and  we let PMC to take care of time integration loop (detail ed in  Sect . 4.2 ). However, in the example of H f2p MDA ’s NWP 

model application  described in  Sec t.  5, we implement AI  DA  in the  3rd  domain downscaled  from  a recursive domain integration. 

In that circumstance, the PMC ’s model integration conductor only consists of a single line, which will be elucidated in  Sec t. 

5.2 .

Once a PMC is ready, w e can still use  mpirun  command to reflect the MPI nature of Python -Fortran hybrid computation as: 

$ mpirun  -n xx python appname_main.py > appname.log 

where  “xx ” is the PE number required by the program,  appname.log  is the log file recording the log information during the 

program running. We may insert this run command line into the existed  run_script  file of the Fortran model to let the H f2p MDA 

run in a large scale of MPI usage by a  qsub  command to submit it to the back -end job queue. 

Text S2: I mplementation  details of an AE architecture 

S2.1 General architecture design of the AE for  SCDA  in  Hf2p MDA -CM2 SCDA 

The autoencoder (AE) used for SCDA in H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  is illustrated in  Fig. S1 . The model adopts a two -branch 

architecture because the atmospheric and oceanic input fields have different spatial resolutions. In the encoder, the two gro ups 

of inputs are first compressed to comparable spatial scales. Their representations are then cou pled through two cross -attention 

stages while the feature dimensions are further compressed. Since the atmospheric and oceanic information has already been 

exchanged and embedded in the latent representation, the decoder does not include additional cross -branch interaction. Instead, 

it decodes the latent representation separately for the atmospheric and oceanic output fields. The model contains 10,329,868 

trainable parameters, including 1,998,340 parameters in the encoder and 8,331,528 parameters in the dec oder. 42 

> Figure S1. Architecture of the AE for SCDA in H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA . The numbers in square brackets indicate the tensor shape after
> each operation, ordered as channel, height, and width. The labels above the arrows denote the transition modules, which are
> described in Text S2.1.

The AE uses standard residual blocks (ResBlocks) to increase network depth and improve representation capacity (He et al., 

2016). The downsampling and upsampling stages are implemented using two -dimensional convolutional layers with  3 × 3

kernels. In the upsampling stages, interpolation is first applied to increase the spatial resolution, followed by a two -dimensional 

convolution. 

The cross -attention modules follow the scaled dot -product attention formulation introduced in the Transformer architecture 

(Vaswani et al., 2017). In general, attention is defined as 

Attention (𝑄 , 𝐾 , 𝑉 ) = softmax  (𝑄 𝐾 ⊤

√𝑑 𝑘 

) 𝑉  (𝑆 1)

where  𝑄 , 𝐾 , 𝑉  are the query, key, and value projections , respectively,  and  𝑑 𝑘  is the dimension of the key  projection . When the 

query is derived from one branch and the key and value are derived from another branch, the operation becomes cross attention .

In each cross -attention stage, the atmospheric and oceanic branches are updated as 

Attention (𝑋 𝑎 𝑊 𝑄 

> 𝑎

, 𝑋 𝑜 𝑊 𝐾  

> 𝑜

, 𝑋 𝑜 𝑊 𝑉 

> 𝑜

)

Attention (𝑋 𝑜 𝑊 𝑄 

> 𝑜

, 𝑋 𝑎 𝑊 𝐾  

> 𝑎

, 𝑋 𝑎 𝑊 𝑉 

> 𝑎

) (𝑆 2)

where  𝑋 𝑎  and  𝑋 𝑜  denote the atmospheric -branch and oceanic -branch features before cross attention, respectively.  𝑊 𝑄 ,

𝑊 𝐾 , and  𝑊 𝑉  are learnable projection matrices. Through these two directional cross -attention operations, information 

is exchanged between the atmospheric and oceanic representations before being compressed into the latent space. 43 

S2.2 Training  details  of the AE for  SCDA  in  Hf2p MDA -CM2 SCDA 

a)  Computing environment and hyperparameters details 

The AE for SCDA in H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  was trained on four NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs using DeepSpeed  (Rasley 

et al. , 2020 ) and distributed data parallel training. The manually selected checkpoint was taken from epoch 72. The dataset 

contained 160,600 samples, including 144,540 training samples and 16,060 validation samples. The batch size on each GPU 

was 4, and 8 gradient -accu mulation steps were used, giving an effective batch size of 128. 

The model was optimized with AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 201 7). The learning rate was  7.5 × 10 −5, the weight decay 

was 0.01, and the AdamW parameters were  𝛽  = (0.9,0.999 ) and  𝜀  = 10 −8. Mixed -precision FP16  (Micikevicius et al. , 201 7)

training was used, with gradient clipping set to 1.0. The learning rate followed a cosine schedule with 5 warm -up epochs and 

a minimum learning rate of  10 −6. The dataloader used 8 workers, a prefetch factor of 32, persistent workers, pinned memory, 

block shuffling, and drop -last batching. 

b) Loss details 

Before training, the CM2 variables were normalized using z -score normalization: 

𝑥  − 𝜇 

𝜎  (𝑆 3)

where  𝜇  and  𝜎  are the mean and standard deviation of each variable, respectively. Invalid values were replaced by zero after 

normalization. Masks were used in the reconstruction loss to exclude invalid grid points where applicable. 

The total CM2 loss was formulated as 

𝐿 total  = 𝜂 atm 𝐿 atm  + 𝜂 ocn 𝐿 ocn  + 𝜆 corrupt 𝐿 corrupt  (𝑆 4)

where  𝐿 atm  and  𝐿 ocn  are the atmospheric and oceanic reconstruction losses, respectively. The domain factors were  𝜂 atm  = 1.0

and  𝜂 ocn  = 1.15 . The latent -corruption weight was  𝜆 corrupt  = 0.12 .

For each domain, the loss was defined as 

𝐿 𝑘  = 𝜆 1𝐿 1 + 𝜆 2𝐿 2 + 𝜆 𝑔 𝐿 grad  + 𝜆 𝑒 𝐿 energy  + 𝜆 𝑠 𝐿 spectral  + 𝜆 𝑏 𝐿 subband  (𝑆 5)

Here,  𝐿 1 and  𝐿 2 are the masked absolute and squared reconstruction errors, respectively.  𝐿 grad  compares horizontal and 

vertical finite -difference gradients,  𝐿 energy  compares the spatial mean of squared amplitudes,  𝐿 spectral  compares log -amplitude 

Fourier spectra, and  𝐿 subband  constrains reconstruction errors in different spatial -frequency bands. The main loss weights were 

𝜆 1 = 1.2, 𝜆 2 = 0.35 , 𝜆 𝑔  = 0.10 , 𝜆 𝑒  = 0.05 , 𝜆 𝑠  = 0.008 , 𝜆 𝑏  = 0.45 

The latent -corruption term used single -pass denoising with Gaussian perturbations applied to the latent representation: 

𝑧 ˜ = 𝑧  + 𝜉 , 𝜉  ∼ 𝒩 (0, 𝜎 𝑧 

> 2

𝐼 ), 𝜎 𝑧  = 0.012 

The subband loss was introduced to reduce reconstruction errors across multiple spatial -frequency ranges. For each predicted 

field  𝑥 ˆ and target field  𝑥 , the two -dimensional Fourier transforms are 44 

𝐹  = ℱ(𝑥 ) (𝑆 6)

The normalized wavenumber radius was divided into four bands: 

[[0,0.25 ), [0.25 ,0.50 ), [0.50 ,0.72 ), [0.72 ,1.01 ]]

For each band  𝑏 , a frequency mask  𝑀 𝑏  was applied, and the corresponding band -limited fields were transformed back to 

physical space: 

𝑥 𝑏  = ℱ−1(𝐹 𝑀 𝑏 ) (𝑆 7)

The reconstruction error in each band was measured using a relative Charbonnier penalty (Charbonnier et al., 1997): 

𝐸 𝑏  = mean [√(𝑥 ˆ𝑏  − 𝑥 𝑏  )2 + 𝜖 2]

max (mean (|𝑥 𝑏 |), 𝜖 ) (𝑆 8)

where  𝜖  = 5 × 10 −3. The final subband loss was calculated as the weighted mean over all frequency bands: 

𝐿 subband  = ∑ 𝑤 𝑏 𝑏  𝐸 𝑏 

∑ 𝑤 𝑏 𝑏 

(𝑆 9)

In the  CM2 configuration, the raw band weights were 

[0.55 , 0.85 , 1.50 , 2.55 ]

with stronger weights assigned to higher -frequency bands. The implementation further applied a mild frequency -dependent 

reweighting with power 0.35, yielding effective weights of approximately 

[0.356 , 0.808 , 1.691 , 3.249 ]

This design is conceptually related to frequency -domain reconstruction losses, which have been used to reduce spectral 

discrepancies between reconstructed and target images or fields, such as the Focal Frequency Loss of Jiang et al. (2021). The 

use of the  Charbonnier penalty provides a robust and differentiable alternative to the absolute error. 

S2. 3 General architecture design of  the  AE for  FSDA in  Hf2p MDA -WRF FSD A

The AE used for  WRF ’s fine -scale convection data assimilation ( FSDA ) in H f2p MDA -WRF FSDA  is shown in  Fig. S2 . Compared 

with the SCDA AE, this architecture is more compact and is mainly built from Swin Transformer blocks (Liu et al., 2021). 

The model contains 53,854,780 trainable parameters, including 41,403,486 parameters in the encoder and 12,451,294 

parameters  in the decoder. 45   

> Figure S2: Architecture of the AE for FSDA in H f2p MDA -WRF FSDA . The notation follows Fig. S1. The transition modules are
> described in Text S2. 3.

In  Fig. S2 , the operations are grouped according to the actual workflow of the encoder, latent modeling module, and decoder. 

Patch embedding denotes the initial strided convolution, which converts gridded input fields into patch tokens and performs 

the first spatial  downsampling. In the encoder, each subsequent transition consists of patch merging followed by Swin 

Transformer blocks. Patch merging reduces the spatial resolution while increasing the feature dimension. 

The final encoder transition uses a linear embedding layer to project the deepest encoder feature into the latent feature 

dimension, followed by latent Swin Transformer blocks. In the decoder, the first transition is a linear projection that maps  the 

laten t feature back to the decoder feature dimension. The following decoder transitions use Swin Transformer blocks together 

with patch expansion to recover the spatial resolution. The final transition uses patch recovery to reconstruct the output fi elds. 

The Swin Transformer blocks follow the shifted -window attention design of Liu et al. (2021), in which self -attention is 

computed within local windows and cross -window communication is achieved by shifted window partitions. Learnable 

position embeddings and  relative position bias are used inside the Transformer modules, but they are not shown separately in 

Fig. S2  for clarity. 

S2.4 Training  details  of the AE for  FSDA in  Hf2p MDA -WRF FSD A

a) Computing environment and hyperparameters details 

The AE for FSDA in H f2p MDA -WRF FSDA  was trained on four NVIDIA L40 GPUs  using PyTorch  distributed data parallel 

training  (Li et al. , 2020). The dataset contained 26,278 samples and was split by quarter into 21,887 training samples, 2,208 

validation samples, and 2,183 test samples. Quarters 1 –10 were used for training, quarter 11 for validation, and quarter 12 for 

testing. The batch size  was 256, the maximum number of epochs was 200, and the optimizer was Adam (Kingma and Ba, 201 4)46 

with a learning rate of  10 −4. The learning rate scheduler was ReduceLROnPlateau with  mode="min" , factor=0.5 , and 

patience=10 . The dataloader used 32 workers and pinned memory. 

b) Loss details 

The WRF variables U10 , V10, T2, and Q2 were normalized using fixed z -score statistics  that are defined by  eq. S 3. Missing 

values were replaced by zero, and all fields were bilinearly interpolated to  256  × 256 . The training target was the input field 

itself; therefore, the task was deterministic autoencoding. 

The FSDA AE was trained with a combination of mean squared error (MSE) and structural similarity loss. The structural 

similarity index measure (SSIM) was originally proposed by Wang et al. (2004). For two fields  𝑥  and  𝑦 , SSIM is defined as 

SSIM (x, y) = (2𝜇 𝑥 𝜇 𝑦  + 𝐶 1)(2𝜎 𝑥𝑦  + 𝐶 2)

(𝜇 𝑥  

> 2

+ 𝜇 𝑦  

> 2

+ 𝐶 1)(𝜎 𝑥  

> 2

+ 𝜎 𝑦  

> 2

+ 𝐶 2) (𝑆 10 )

where  𝜇 𝑥  and  𝜇 𝑦  are local means,  𝜎 𝑥  

> 2

and  𝜎 𝑦  

> 2

are local variances,  𝜎 𝑥𝑦  is the local covariance, and  𝐶 1 and  𝐶 2 are small constants 

used for numerical stability. 

The final training loss was 

𝐿  = MSE (𝑦 ˆ ⊙ 𝑀 , 𝑦  ⊙ 𝑀 ) + 0.2[1 − SSIM (𝑦 ˆ ⊙ 𝑀 , 𝑦  ⊙ 𝑀 )] (𝑆 11 )

where  𝒚 ̂ is the reconstructed field,  𝒚  is the target field,  𝑴  is the mask, and  ⊙ denotes element -wise multiplication. The MSE 

term constrains pointwise reconstruction accuracy, whereas the SSIM term provides an additional structural constraint on the 

reconstructed spatial pattern .

Text S3: L3DVar running details 

This section summarizes the optimization settings and computational cost of L3DVar in the two assimilation applications. The 

weighted objective function used in both configurations is defined as 

𝐽 (𝐳 ) = 1

2 ‖𝐳  − 𝐳 𝑏 ‖𝐁 𝑧  

> −1
> 2

+ 𝜆 

2 ‖𝐲  − ℋ(𝐷 (𝐳 ))‖𝐑 −1 

> 2

(S12 )

where  𝜆  controls the relative contribution of the observation term. The estimation of  𝐁 𝑧  for the two applications is described 

in  Sect. 4.3.2 and 5.3.2 . The corresponding covariance settings and optimization parameters are listed in  Table S 1.

> Table S1. L3DVar optimization settings.

Application  𝝀  Number  of iterations  Learning rate  Optimizer 

SCDA by H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  100  100  10 −3 Adam 

FSDA by H f2p MDA -WRF FSDA  1000  300  10 −3 Adam 47 

In addition to the optimization configuration, the computational contribution of L3DVar was evaluated for the FSDA by 

Hf2p MDA -WRF FSDA  experiment.  Table S2  reports the accumulated DA cost relative to the main model runtime and the total 

runtime including output writing.   

> Table S2. Computational efficiency of L3DVar in the SCDA by H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA and FSDA by H f2p MDA -WRF FSDA experiments.
> DA total denotes the accumulated runtime of the L3DVar optimization, Total main denotes the total runtime of the main workflo w,
> and DA/main is their ratio. The f2py overhead denotes the additional runtime introduced by the Python –Fortran inter face, and
> Interface efficiency denotes the fraction of the DA runtime excluding this overhead.

Case  DA total  Total main  DA/main  f2py overhead  Interface efficiency 

SCDA by H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  3052.7927 s  22740.1087 s  13.42%  - -

FSDA by H f2p MDA -WRF FSDA  2782.3042 s  28053.3913 s  9.92%  0.3129 s  99.99% 

L3DVar accounted for 13.42% and 9.92% of the total main runtime in the SCDA by H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA  and FSDA by 

Hf2p MDA -WRF FSDA  experiments, respectively. The f2py overhead was negligible in the latter experiment. The interface 

overhead was not measured for SCDA by H f2p MDA -CM2 SCDA .

References S1 

Charbonnier, P., Blanc -Feraud , L., Aubert, G., and Barlaud, M.: Deterministic edge -preserving regularization in computed 

imaging, IEEE Trans. on Image Process., 6, 298 –311,  https://doi.org/10.1109/83.551699 , 1997. 

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J.: Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, in: 2016 IEEE Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 

(CVPR), 770 –778,  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90 , 2016. 

Jiang, L., Dai, B., Wu, W., and Loy, C. C.: Focal Frequency Loss for Image Reconstruction and Synthesis, in: 2021 IEEE/CVF 

International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 

13899 –13909,  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01366 , 2021. 

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980 , 2014. 

Li, S., Zhao, Y., Varma, R., Salpekar, O., Noordhuis, P., Li, T., Paszke, A., Smith, J., Vaughan, B., Damania, P., and Chinta la, 

S.: PyTorch distributed: experiences on accelerating data parallel training, Proc. VLDB Endow., 13, 3005 –3018, 

https://doi.org/10.14778/3415478.3415530 , 2020. 

Liu, Z., Lin, Y., Cao, Y., Hu, H., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z., Lin, S., and Guo, B.: Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transforme r

using Shifted Windows, in: 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021 IEEE/CVF 

International Conferen ce on Computer Vision (ICCV), 9992 –10002,  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986 , 2021. 

Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F.: Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1711.05101 , 2017. 48 

Micikevicius, P., Narang, S., Alben, J., Diamos, G., Elsen, E., Garcia, D., Ginsburg, B., Houston, M., Kuchaiev, O., Venkates h, 

G., and Wu, H.: Mixed Precision Training,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1710.03740 , 2017. 

Rasley, J., Rajbhandari, S., Ruwase, O., and He, Y.: DeepSpeed : System Optimizations Enable Training Deep Learning 

Models with Over 100 Billion Parameters, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 

Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discove ry and Data Mining, 3505 –

3506,  https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3406703 , 2020. 

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin , I.: Attention Is All 

You Need,  https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1706.03762 , 2017. 

Zhou Wang, Bovik, A. C., Sheikh, H. R., and Simoncelli, E. P.: Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural 

similarity, IEEE Trans. on Image Process., 13, 600 –612,  https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2003.819861 , 2004.